12. An apology for Raymond Sebond 


[The chapter which follows is by far the longest one which Montaigne ever wrote. It is discussed in the Introduction 
(pp. xx—xliv). In the Appendices to that Introduction are given a translation of Montaigne’s dedication to his father of 
his French version of Raymond Sebond Is Theologia naturalis, as well as a translation of Montaigne’s French version of 
the Prologue of Raymond Sebond himself]. 

[A] Truly, learning is a most useful accomplishment and a great one. Those who 
despise it give ample proof of their animal-stupidity. Yet I do not prize its worth at that 
extreme value given to it by some, such as the philosopher Erillus who lodged Supreme 
Good in it, holding that it was within the power of learning to make us wise and 
contented. 1 That, I do not believe - nor what others have said: that learning is the 
Mother of virtue and that all vice is born of Ignorance. If that is true, it needs a lengthy 
gloss. 2 

My house has long been open to erudite men and is well known to them, since my 
father, who had the ordering of it for fifty years and more, ah ablaze with that new 
ardour with which King Francis I embraced letters and raised them in esteem, spent a 
great deal of trouble and money seeking the acquaintance of the learned, welcoming 
them into his house as holy persons who had been granted private inspiration by Divine 
Wisdom; he collected their sayings and their reasonings as though they were oracles - 
with all the more awe and devotion in that he had less right to judge: he had no 
acquaintance with literature, [Al] any more than his forebears did. [A] I like learned 
men myself, but I do not worship them. 

Among others there was Pierre Bunel, a man who, in his own time, enjoyed a great 
reputation for learning.- He and other men of his kind stayed several days at Montaigne 
in my father’s company; when leaving, Bunel gave him a book called Theologia 
Naturalis sive Liber creaturarum magistri Raymondi de Sabonde - Natural Theology, or, 
The Book of Creatures by Master Raymond Sebond. My father was familiar with Italian 
and Spanish and so, since the book is composed in a kind of pidgin - Spanish with 
Latin endings - Bunel hoped that my father could profit by it with only very little help. 
He recommended it to him as a book which was very useful for the period in which he 
gave it to him: that was when the novelties of Luther were beginning to be esteemed, in 
many places shaking our old religion. He was well advised, clearly deducing that this 
new disease would soon degenerate into loathsome atheism. The mass of ordinary 
people- lack the faculty of judging things as they are, letting themselves be carried away 
by chance appearances. Once you have put into their hands the foolhardiness of 
despising and criticizing opinions which they used to hold in the highest awe (such as 


465 




those which concern their salvation), and once you have thrown into the balance of 
doubt and uncertainty [C] any [A] articles of their religion, they soon cast all the rest of 
their beliefs into similar uncertainty. They had no more authority for them, no more 
foundation, than for those you have just undermined; and so, as though it were the yoke 
of a tyrant, they shake off all those other concepts which had been impressed upon 
them by the authority of Law and the awesomeness of ancient custom. 


[B] Nam cupide conculcatur nimis ante metutum. 


[That which once was feared too greatly is now avidly trampled underfoot.]- 

[A] They then take it upon themselves to accept nothing on which they have not 
pronounced their own approval, subjecting it to their individual assent. 

Now, my father, a few days before he died, happened to light upon this book 
beneath a pile of old papers; he ordered me to put it into French for him. It is good to 
translate authors like these, where there is little to express apart from the matter. 
Authors much devoted to grace and elegance of language are a dangerous- undertaking, 
[C] especially when you are turning them into a weaker language. [A] It was a strange 
and novel occupation for me, but, happening to be at leisure and never being able to 
refuse any command from the best father that ever was, I did what I could and finished 
it. He took particular delight in it and gave instructions to have it printed. They were 
carried out after his death. 2 

I found the concepts of Sebond to be beautiful, the structure of his book well 
executed and his project full of piety. Many people spend time reading it - especially 
ladies, to whom we owe greater courtesy. I have often been able to help them by 
relieving this book of the weight of the two main objections made against it. (Sebond’s 
aim is a bold and courageous one, since he undertakes to establish against the atheists 
and to show by human, natural reasons the truth of all the articles of the Christian 
religion.) 

Frankly, I find him so firm and so successful in this, that I do not think it is possible 
to do better on this topic and I do not believe that anyone has done so well. 

It seemed too rich and too fine a book for an author whose name is so obscure - all 
we know of him is that he was a Spaniard professing medicine in Toulouse some two 
hundred years ago; so I once asked Adrian Tumebus - who knew everything - what he 
made of it. 2 He replied that he thought it was a quintessence distilled from St Thomas 


466 


Aquinas, only a wit like Thomas’s, full of infinite learning and staggering subtlety, being 
capable of such concepts. Anyway, whoever it was who conceived and wrote this book 
(and it is not reasonable to deprive Sebond of his title without greater cause), he was a 
most talented man, having many fine accomplishments. 

The first charge made against the book is that Christians do themselves wrong by 
wishing to support their belief with human reasons: belief is grasped only by faith and 
by private inspiration from God’s grace. 

A pious zeal may be seen behind this objection; so any assay at satisfying those who 
put it forward must be made with gentleness and respect. It is really a task for a man 
versed in Theology rather than for me, who know nothing about it. Nevertheless, this is 
my verdict: in a matter so holy, so sublime, so far surpassing Man’s intellect as is that 
Truth by which it has pleased God in his goodness 2 to enlighten us, we can only grasp 
that Truth and lodge it within us if God favours us with the privilege of further help, 
beyond the natural order. 

I do not believe, then, that purely human means have the capacity to do this; if they 
had, many choice and excellent souls in ancient times - souls abundantly furnished with 
natural faculties - would not have failed to reach such knowledge by discursive 
reasoning. Only faith can embrace, with a lively certainty, the high mysteries of our 
religion.- 

But that is not to imply that it is other than a most fair and praiseworthy undertaking 
to devote to the service of our faith those natural, human tools which God has granted 
us. It is not to be doubted that it is the most honourable use that we could ever put them 
to and that there is no task, no design, more worthy of a Christian than to aim, by 
assiduous reflection, at beautifying, developing and clarifying the truth of his beliefs. 
We are not content merely to serve God with our spirits and our souls: we owe him 
more than that, doing him reverence with our bodies; we honour him with our very 
members, our actions and with things external. In the same way we must accompany our 
faith with all the reason that lies within us - but always with the reservation that we 
never reckon that faith depends upon ourselves or that our efforts and our conjectures 
can ever themselves attain to a knowledge so supernatural, so divine. 

If faith does not come and dwell within us as something infused, beyond the natural 
order; if she comes in, not just by reasoning but by any human means, then she is not 
there in her dignity and splendour. And yet I fear that we do only enjoy her presence in 
that way. If we held fast to God by means of a lively faith; if we held fast to God by 
God, not by ourselves; if our footing and our foundation were divine: then human events 
would not have the power to shake us which they do have; our fortress would not be for 


467 


surrendering to so feeble a battery; the love of novelty, the constraint of Princes, the 
good luck of one party or rash and fortuitous changes in our own opinions, would have 
no power to shake our beliefs or modify them. We would not let our faith be troubled at 
the mercy of some new argument or by persuasion - not by all the rhetoric there ever 
was. We would withstand such billows with a firmness, unbending and unmoved: 


I Hisos fluctus rnpes ut vasta refundit, 
Et varias circum latrantes dissipat undas 
Mole sua... 


[As a mighty rock, by its very mass, withstands the lashing waves, pouring them back 
and breaking up the waters raging round about it... ] — 

If a ray of God’s light touched us even slightly, it would be everywhere apparent: not 
only our words but our deeds would bear its lustre and its brightness. Everything 
emanating from us would be seen shining with that noble light. We ought to be 
ashamed: among the schools of human philosophy there never was an initiate who did 
not make his conduct and his life conform, at least in some respect, to their teachings, 
however difficult or strange: and yet so holy and heavenly an ordinance as ours only 
marks Christians on their tongues. 

[B] Do you want to see that for yourself? Then compare our behaviour with a 
Moslem’s or a pagan’s: you always remain lower than they are. Yet, given the advantage 
of our own religion, our superiority ought to outshine them, far beyond any comparison. 
Men ought to say: ‘Are they really so just, so loving, so good? Then these people must 
be Christians.’- [C] All other manifestations are common to all religions: hope, trust, 
deliverances, ceremonies, penances and martyrdoms. The distinctive mark of the Truth 
we hold ought to be virtue, which is the most exacting mark of Truth, the closest one to 
heaven and the most worthy thing that Truth produces. 

[B] That is why our good Saint Louis was right, when the Tartar king who was 
converted to Christianity planned to come to Lyons to kiss the Pope’s feet and to study 
the holiness he hoped to find in our behaviour, to turn him away from it at once, fearing 
that our disordered way of life would sour his taste for so sacred a belief .- 

The actual outcome, on the other hand, was different for that later convert who went 
to Rome for the same purpose: seeing the dissolute life of the prelates and people there 
at that time, he became even more firmly attached to our religion: he considered how 
much strength and holiness it must have to be able to maintain its dignity and splendour 
in the midst of corruption so great, in hands so vicious! 14 


468 


[A] The Word of God says that if we had one single drop of faith we would ‘move 
mountains’:- our actions, guided and accompanied by God, would not be simply human: 
they would partake of the miraculous, just as our belief does. [C] ‘Brevis est institutio 
vitae honestae beataeque, si creclas ’ [Laying the principles for an honourable and blessed 
life is soon done... if you believe]. - 

Some people make the world believe that they hold beliefs they do not hold. A 
greater number make themselves believe it, having no idea what ‘believing’ really means, 
once you go deeply into the matter. [A] We find it strange when, in the wars now 
besetting our country, we see the outcome of events drifting and changing in a manner 
marked by nothing unusual or beyond the natural order. That is because we bring to it 
nothing beyond ourselves. There is Justice on one of the sides, but only as a decoration 
and a cloak - often cited but never received, welcomed and truly wedded. Justice is 
lodged as in the mouth of a lawyer, not as in the heart and emotions of the man whose 
suit it is. God owes help - beyond the natural order - to our faith, to our religion: he 
does not owe it to our passions. 1 Men take the lead in them, making use of religion: 
things ought to be clean contrary.- 

[C] Think whether we do not take religion into our own hands and twist it like wax 
into shapes quite opposed to a rule so unbending and direct. Has that ever been seen 
more clearly than in France today? Some approach it from this side, some from the 
other; some make it black, others make it white: all are alike in using religion for their 
violent and ambitious schemes, so like each other in managing their affairs with excess 
and injustice, that they make you doubt whether they really do hold different opinions 
over a matter on which depends the way we conduct and regulate our lives. Could you 
find behaviour more like, more closely identical even, coming from the same teaching in 
the same school? Just see the horrifying impudence with which we toss theological 
arguments to and fro and how irreligiously we cast them off or take them up again, 
whenever we happen to switch places in these civil tumults. Take that most formal 
proposition: Whether it be permitted for a Subject to rebel and to take up arms against 
his Ruler, in defence of his religion? First, remember which side, only last year, was 
mouthing the affirmative, making it the buttress of their faction, and what side was 
mouthing the negative, making their buttress out of that. Then listen from what quarter 
come voices defending which side now, and judge whether they are rattling their swords 
less for this side than they did for the other!- We burn people at the stake for saying 
that Truth must bow to our necessities: and, in France, how much worse is what we do 
than what we say! 

[A] Let us confess the truth: pick out, even from the lawful, moderate army,- those 


469 


who are fighting simply out of zeal for their religious convictions; then add those who 
are concerned only to uphold the laws of their country and to serve their King: you 
would not have enough to form one full company of fighting men. How does it happen 
that so few can be found who maintain a consistent will and action in our civil 
disturbances? How does it happen that you can see them sometimes merely ambling 
along, sometimes charging headlong - the very same men sometimes ruining our affairs 
by their violence and harshness and at other times by their lukewarmness, their softness 
and their sloth? It must be that they have been motivated by private concerns, [C] by 
ones due to chance; [A] as these change, so do they. 

[C] It is evident to me that we only willingly carry out those religious duties which 
flatter our passions. Christians excel at hating enemies. Our zeal works wonders when it 
strengthens our tendency towards hatred, enmity, ambition, avarice, evil-speaking... and 
rebellion. On the other hand, zeal never makes anyone go flying towards goodness, 
kindness or temperance, unless he is miraculously pre-disposed to them by some rare 
complexion. Our religion was made to root out vices: now it cloaks them, nurses them, 
stimulates them. 

[A] There is a saying: ‘Do not try to palm off sheaves of straw on God.’ If we 
believed in God - I do not mean by faith but merely with bare credence, indeed (and I 
say it to our great shame) if we believed him and knew him just as we believe historical 
events or one of our companions, then we would love him above all other things, on 
account of the infinite goodness and beauty shining within him: at the very least he 
would march equal in the ranks of our affections with riches, pleasure, glory and 
friends.- [C] The best among us does not fear to offend him as much as offending 
neighbour, kinsman, master. On this side there is the object of one of our vicious 
pleasures: on the other, the glorious state of immortality, equally known and equally 
convincing - is there anyone so simple-minded as to barter one for the other? And yet 
we often give it up altogether, out of pure contempt; for what attracts us to blasphemy 
except, perhaps, the taste of the offence itself? 

Antisthenes, the philosopher, was being initiated into the Orphic mysteries; the 
priest said that those who make their religious profession would receive after death joys, 
perfect and everlasting. He replied: ‘Why do you not die yourself then?’ Diogenes’ retort 
was more brusque (that was his fashion) and rather off our subject: when the priest was 
preaching at him to join his order so as to obtain the blessings of the world to come, he 
replied: ‘Are you asking me to believe that great men like Agesilaus and Epaminondas 
will be wretched, whilst a calf like you will be happy, just because you are a priest? - 

[A] If we were to accept the great promises of everlasting blessedness as having the 


470 


same authority as a philosophical argument, no more, we would not hold death in such 
horror as we do: 


[B] Non jam se moriens dissolvi conquereretur; 
Sed magis ire foras, vestemque relinquere, ut anguis, 
Gauderet, praelonga senex aut cornua cervus. 


[The dying man would not then complain that he is being ‘loosened asunder’, but 
would, rather, rejoice to be ‘going outside’, like a snake casting off its skin, or an old 
stag casting off his over-long antlers. ]- 

[A] ‘I wish to be loosened asunder’, he would say, ‘and to be with Jesus Christ.’ The 
force of Plato’s dialogue on the immortality of the soul led some of his disciples to kill 
themselves, the sooner to enjoy the hopes which he gave them.- 

All this is a clear sign that we accept our religion only as we would fashion it, only 
from our own hands - no differently from the way other religions gain acceptance. We 
happen to be bom in a country where it is practised, or else we have regard for its age or 
for the authority of the men who have upheld it; perhaps we fear the threats which it 
attaches to the wicked or go along with its promises. Such considerations as these must 
be deployed in defence of our beliefs, but only as support-troops. Their bonds are 
human. Another region, other witnesses, similar promises or similar menaces, would, in 
the same way, stamp a contrary belief on us. [B] We are Christians by the same title 
that we are Perigordians or Germans. 

[A] Plato said few men are so firm in their atheism that a pressing danger does not 
bring them to acknowledge divine power;- such behaviour has nothing to do with a true 
Christian; only mortal, human religions become accepted by human procedures. What 
sort of faith must it be that is planted by cowardice and established in us by feebleness 
of heart! [C] What an agreeable faith, which believes what it believes, because it is not 
brave enough to disbelieve it! [A] How can vicious passions, such as inconstancy and 
sudden dismay, produce in our souls anything right? 

[C] Plato says that people first decide, by reasoned judgement, that what is told 
about hell and future punishment is just fiction. But when they have the opportunity 
really to find out, by experience, when old age or illness brings them close to death, then 
the terror of it fills them with belief again, out of horror for what awaits them. 

To impress such ideas upon people is to make them timorous of heart: that is why 
Plato in his Laws forbids any teaching of threats such as these or of any conviction that 
ill can come to Man from the gods. (When it does happen, it is for man’s greater good 


471 


or like a medical purgation. )- 

They tell that Bion, infected by the atheistic teachings of Theodorus, used to mock 
religious men; but eventually, when death approached, he gave himself over to the most 
extreme superstitions, as though the gods took themselves off and brought themselves 
back according to the needs of Bion.- 

Plato - and these examples - lead to the conclusion that either love or force can 
bring us back to a belief in God. Atheism, as a proposition, is a monstrous thing, 
stripped, as it were, of natural qualities. It is awkward and difficult to fix it firmly in the 
human spirit, however impudent or however unruly. We have seen plenty of people who 
are egged on by vanity and pride to conceive lofty opinions for setting the world to 
rights; to put themselves in countenance they affect to profess atheism: but even if they 
are mad enough to try and plant it in their consciousness, they are not strong enough to 
do so. Give them a good thrust through the breast with your sword and they never fail to 
raise clasped hands to heaven. And when fear or sickness has cooled down the licentious 
fever-heat of that transient humour, they never fail to come back to themselves again, 
letting themselves be reconciled to recognized standards and beliefs. Seriously digested 
doctrine is one thing: these surface impressions are quite another. They are bom of a 
mind unhinged, in the spirit of debauchery; they drift rashly and erratically about in the 
fancies of men. What wretched, brainless men they are, trying to be worse than they can 
be! 

[A] That great soul [C] of Plato [A] - great, however, with merely human greatness 
- was led into a neighbouring mistake by the error of paganism and his ignorance of our 
holy Truth: he held that it is children and old men who are most susceptible to religion, 
as if religion were born of human weakness and drew her credibility from it.— [A] The 
knot which ought to attach our judgement and our will and to clasp our souls firmly to 
our Creator should not be one tied together with human considerations and strengthened 
by emotions: it should be drawn tight in a clasp both divine and supernatural, and have 
only one form, one face, one lustre; namely, the authority of God and his grace. 

But, once our hearts and souls are governed by Faith, it is reasonable that she should 
further her purposes by drawing upon all of our other parts, according to their several 
capacities. Moreover, it is simply not believable that there should be no prints 
whatsoever impressed upon the fabric of this world by the hand of the great Architect, 
or that there should not be at least some image within created things relating to the 
Workman who made them and fashioned them. He has left within these lofty works the 
impress of his Godhead: only our weakness stops us from discovering it. He tells us 
himself that he makes manifest his unseen workings through those things which are 


472 


seen. Sebond toiled at this honourable endeavour, showing us that there is no piece 
within this world which belies its Maker. God’s goodness would be put in the wrong if 
the universe were not compatible with our beliefs. All things, Heaven, Earth, the 
elements, our bodies and our souls are in one accord: we simply have to find how to use 
them. If we have the capacity to understand, they will teach us. [B] For this world is a 
most holy Temple into which Man has been brought in order to contemplate the Sun, 
the heavenly bodies, the waters and the dry land - objects not sculpted by mortal hands 
but made manifest to our senses by the Divine Mind in order to represent intelligibles. 
[A] “The invisible things of God’, says St Paul, ‘are clearly seen from the creation of the 
world, his Eternal Wisdom and his Godhead being perceived from the things he has 
made.’- 


Atque adeo faciem coeli non invidet orbi 
Ipse Deus, vultusque suos corpusque recludit 
Semper volvendo; seque ipsum inculcat et offert, 
Ut bene cognosci possit, doceatque videndo 
Qualis eat, doceatque suas attendere leges. 


[God himself does not begrudge to the world the sight of the face of heaven, which, 
ever-rolling, unveils his countenance, his incorporate being inculcating and offering 
himself to us, so that he may be known full well; he teaches the man who contemplates 
to recognize his state, teaches him, also, to wait upon his laws.]- 

Our human reasonings and concepts are like matter, heavy and barren: God’s grace 
is their form, giving them shape and worth. The virtuous actions of Socrates and of 
Cato remain vain and useless, since they did not have, as their end or their aim, love of 
the true Creator of all things nor obedience to him: they did not know God; the same 
applies to our concepts and thoughts: they have a body of sorts, but it is a formless mass, 
unenlightened and without shape, unless accompanied by faith in God and by grace. 
When Faith tinges the themes of Sebond and throws her light upon them, she makes 
them firm and solid. They then have the capacity of serving as a finger-post, as an 
elementary guide setting an apprentice on the road leading to knowledge such as this; 
they fashion him somewhat into shape and make him capable of God’s grace, which 
then furnishes out our belief and perfects it. 

I know a man of authority, a cultured, educated man, who admitted to me that he 
had been led back from the errors of disbelief by means of the arguments of Sebond. 
Even if you were to strip them of their ornaments and of the help and approbation of 
Faith - even if you were to take them for purely human notions - you would find, when 
it comes to fighting those who have plunged down into the dreadful, horrible darkness 


473 


of irreligion, that they still remain more solid and more firm than any others of the same 
kind which you can set up against them. We rightly can say to our opponents, Si melius 
quid habes, accerse, vel imperium fer’ [If you have anything better, produce it, or 
submit]:- let them allow the force of our proofs or else show us others, elsewhere, on 
another subject, as closely woven or of better stuff. 

Without thinking I have already half-slipped into the second of the charges which I 
set out to counter on behalf of Sebond. 

Some say that his arguments are weak and unsuited to what he wants to 
demonstrate; they set out to batter them down with ease. People like those need to be 
shaken rather more roughly, since they are more dangerous than the first and more 
malicious. [C] We are only too willing to couch other men’s writings in senses which 
favour our settled opinions: an atheist prides himself on bringing all authors into accord 
with atheism, poisoning harmless matter with his own venom.- [A] Such people have 
some mental prepossession which makes Sebond’s reasons seem insipid. Moreover it 
seems to them that they have been allowed an easy game, with freedom to fight against 
our religion with purely human weapons: they would never dare to attack her in the full 
majesty of her imperious authority. The means I use and which seem more fitted to 
abating such a frenzy is to trample down human pride and arrogance, crushing them 
under our feet; I make men feel the emptiness, the vanity, the nothingness of Man, 
wrenchingfrom their grasp the sickly arms of human reason, making them bow their 
heads and bite the dust before the authority and awe of the Divine Majesty, to whom 
alone belong knowledge and wisdom; who alone can esteem himself in any way, and 
from whom we steal whatever worth or value we pride ourselves on: 
Ou yap ea (ppoveiv 3 Oedg peya akXov fj ecozov [q oc j permits no one to esteem him self 

higher].— 

[C] Let us smash down such presumption. It is the very foundation of the tyrannous 
rule of the Evil Spirit: ‘Deus superbis resistit; humilibus autem dat gratiam ’ [God resisteth 
the proud, and giveth grace to the humble]. ‘There is intelligence in all the gods,’ says 
Plato, ‘but very little of it in men.’- 

[A] Yet it is a great source of consolation to a Christian man to see our transitory 
mortal tools so properly matched to our holy and divine faith that when we use them on 
subjects which, like them, are transitory and mortal, it is precisely then that they are 
most closely and most powerfully matched. Let us try and see, then, whether a man has 
in his power any reasons stronger than those of Sebond - whether, indeed, it is in man 
to arrive at any certainty by argument and reflection. 

[C] St Augustine, pleading his case against presumptuous people, has cause to 


474 


criticize their injustice when they consider those parts of our faith to be false which 
human reason is unable to establish. In order to show that many things can exist or have 
had existence, even though their nature and causes have no foundation which can be 
fixed by rational discourse, he advances various indubitable, recognized experiences, for 
which Man admits he can see no explanation. Augustine does this, as he does all things, 
after careful and intelligent search.- We must do even more, teaching such people the 
lesson that the weakness of their reason can be proved without our having to marshal 
rare examples; that reason is so inadequate, so blind, that there is no example so clear 
and easy as to be clear enough for her; that the easy and the hard are all one to her; that 
all subjects and Nature in general equally deny her any sway or jurisdiction. 

[A] What is Truth teaching us, when she preaches that we must fly from the wisdom 
of this world; when she so frequently urges that what seems wise to Man is but 
foolishness to God; that of all vain things, Man is the most vain; that a man who dares to 
presume that he knows anything, does not even know what knowledge is; that Man, who 
is nothing yet thinks he is something, misleads and deceives himself? These are verdicts 
of the Holy Ghost;- they express so clearly and so vividly what I myself wish to uphold 
that I would need no other proof to use against people who, with due submission and 
obedience, would surrender to his authority. But these people simply ask to be whipped, 
and will not let us fight their reason, save by reason alone. 

So let us consider for a while Man in isolation - Man with no outside help, armed 
with no arms but his own and stripped of that grace and knowledge of God in which 
consist his dignity, his power and the very ground of his being.- Let us see how much 
constancy there is in all his fine panoply. Let Man make me understand, by the force of 
discursive reason, what are the grounds on which he has founded and erected all those 
advantages which he thinks he has over other creatures and who has convinced him that 
it is for his convenience, his service, that, for so many centuries, there has been 
established and maintained the awesome motion of the vault of heaven, the everlasting 
light of those tapers coursing so proudly overhead or the dread surging of the boundless 
sea? Is it possible to imagine anything more laughable than that this pitiful, wretched 
creature - who is not even master of himself, but exposed to shocks on every side - 
should call himself Master and Emperor of a universe, the smallest particle of which he 
has no means of knowing, let alone swaying! Man claims the privilege of being unique 
in that, within this created frame, he alone is able to recognize its structure and its 
beauty; he alone is able to render thanks to its Architect or to tot up the profit or loss of 
the world... But who impressed his seal on such a privilege? If Man has been given so 
great and fair a commission, let him produce documents saying so. [C] Were they drawn 
up in favour of wise men only? (They apply to few enough!)- Are fools and knaves 


475 


worthy of a favour so far exceeding the normal order - the worst thing in the world 
exalted above all others? Are we supposed to believe that fellow who wrote: ‘Quorum 
igitur causa quis dixerit effectum esse mundum? Eorum scilicet animantium quae ratione 
utuntur. Hi sunt dii et homines , quibus profecto nihil est melius ’ [Who will tell for whose 
sake this world has been brought about? Why, for the sake of beings having souls able 
to use reason, those most perfect of beings, gods and men].- Coupling gods and men 
together! We can never do enough to batter down such impudence. 

[A] Poor little wretch! What is there in man worthy of such a privilege? 

Consider the sun, moon and stars, with their lives free from corruption, their beauty, 
their grandeur, their motions ever proceeding by laws so just: 


cum suspicimus magni ccielestia mundi 
Templa super, stellisque micantibus Aetliera fixum, 
Et venit in mentem Lunae Solisque viarum; 


[When we gaze upwards to the celestial temples of this great Universe, to the Aether 
with its fixed and twinkling stars, and when there comes to mind the courses of the 
Moon and of the Sun.. .]— 

then consider the dominion and power which those bodies have, not only over our 
lives and the settled detail of our fortunes - 


Facta etenim et vitas hominum suspendit ab astris 


[For he made the deeds and lives of man to depend upon the Sun, the Moon and the 
Stars]- - 

- but over our very inclinations, our discursive reasoning and our wills, which are all 
governed, driven and shaken at the mercy of their influences. Our reason tells us that 
and finds it to be so; 


speculataque longe 

Deprendit tacitis dominantia legibus astra, 
Et totum alterna mundum ratione moveri, 
Fatorumque vices certis discemere signis. 


[it gazes in the distance, grasping that the heavenly bodies govern us by silent laws, 
that all the world is moved by periodic causes; and it discerns changing Fate in fixed and 
certain signs.] 


476 


Then see how not merely one man or one king is sent reeling by the slightest motion 
of the heavenly bodies, but whole monarchies, empires and all this lower world: 


Qucintaque quam parvi faciant discrimina motus: 
Tantum est hoc regnum, quod regibus imperat ipsis! 


[When such small motions produce such changes, how great must be the kingdom 
which rules over kings themselves!] 

Then allow that our reason judges that our virtues and our vices, our competencies, 
our knowledge, and this very discourse we are making here and now about the power of 
the heavenly bodies, comes to us by their means and by their favour: 


furit alter amore, 

Et pontum tranare potest et vertere Trojam; 

Alterius sors est scribendis legibus apta; 

Ecce patrem nati perimunt, natosque parentes; 
Mutuaque armati coeunt in vulnera fratres: 

Non nostrum hoc bellum est; coguntur tanta movere, 
Inque suas ferri poenas, lacerandaque membra; 
Hoc quoque fatale est, sic ipsum expendere fatum. 


[One man, mad with love, can cross the sea and topple Troy: another’s lot is to be apt 
at prescribing laws. Look: children kill parents: parents, children; brothers bear arms 
and clash to wound each other. Such wars do not belong to men alone. Men are 
compelled to do such things, compelled to punish themselves, to tear their limbs apart. 
And when we ponder thus on Fate, that too is fated...] 

If we are dependent upon the disposition of the heavens for such little rationality as 
we have, how can our reason make us equal to the Heavens? How can their essence, or 
the principles on which they are founded, be subjects of human knowledge? Everything 
that we can see in those bodies produces in us ecstatic wonder. [C] ‘Quae molitio, quae 
ferramenta, qui vectes, quae machinae, qui ministri tanti opens fuerunt?’ [What 
engineering, what tools, what levers, what contrivances, what agents were used in such 
an enterprise?]- 

[A] Why do we deprive the heavenly bodies of souls, life or rationality? Have we, 
who have no dealings with them beyond pure obedience, been able to recognize in them 
some kind of stupor, motionless and insensible? [C] Shall we say that we have seen no 
other creature but Man possessed of a rational soul? What do we mean? Have we ever 
seen anything like the Sun? And just because we have seen nothing like it, does it cease 


477 


to be; or, since we have seen nothing like its movements, shall they, too, cease to be? If 
things we have not actually seen do not exist, then our knowledge is wondrously 
diminished! ‘Quae sunt tantae animi angustiae’ [What narrow defiles has our mind].- 

[A] What vain human dreams, to make the Moon into some celestial Earth, [C] 
dreaming up, like Anaxagoras, mountains and valleys for it, [A] planting human 
dwellings and habitations on it and, like Plato and Plutarch, settling colonies there for 
our convenience: and then to make our own Earth into a brightly shining star: [C] ‘Inter 
caetera mortalitatis incommoda et hoc est, calligo mentium, nec tantum necessitas errandi 
sed errorum amor’ [Among the other disorders of our mortal condition there is that 
mental darkness which not only compels us to go wrong but makes us love to do so]. 
‘Corruptibile corpus aggravat animam, et deprimit terrena inhabitatio sensum multa 
cogitantem’ [For the corruptible body is a load upon the soul, and the earthly habitation 
presseth down the mind that museth on many things] 

[A] The natural, original distemper of Man is presumption. Man is the most 
blighted and frail of all creatures and, moreover, the most given to pride.- This creature 
knows and sees that he is lodged down here, among the mire and shit of the world, 
bound and nailed to the deadest, most stagnant part of the universe, in the lowest storey 
of the building, the farthest from the vault of heaven; his characteristics place him in the 
third and lowest category of animate creatures, yet, in thought, he sets himself above the 
circle of the Moon, bringing the very heavens under his feet. The vanity of this same 
thought makes him equal himself to God; attribute to himself God’s mode of being; 
pick himself out and set himself apart from the mass of other creatures; and (although 
they are his fellows and his brothers) carve out for them such helpings of force or 
faculties as he thinks fit. How can he, from the power of his own understanding, know 
the hidden, inward motivations of animate creatures? What comparison between us and 
them leads him to conclude that they have the attributes of senseless brutes? 

[C] When I play with my cat, how do I know that she is not passing time with me 
rather than I with her?- 

In his description of the Golden Age under Saturn, Plato counted among one of the 
principal advantages which Man then had his ability to communicate with the beasts; 
inquiring and learning from them, Man knew what they were really like and how they 
differed from each other. By this means Man used to acquire a full understanding and 
discretion, leading his life far more happily than we ever can now. After that, do we 
need a better proof of the impudence of Man towards beast? Well, that great author 
then opined that Nature mainly gave the beasts their bodily forms to enable the men in 
his time to foretell the future !— 


478 


[A] Why should it be a defect in the beasts not in us which stops all communication 
between us? We can only guess whose fault it is that we cannot understand each other: 
for we do not understand them any more than they understand us. They may reckon us 
to be brute beasts for the same reason that we reckon them to be so. It is no great 
miracle if we cannot understand them: we cannot understand Basques or Troglodytes! - 

[Al] Some have boasted, though, that they could understand the beasts: Apollonius 
of Thyana, [B] Melampus, Tiresias, Thales [AI] and others. [B] And since there are 
nations (so the cosmographers tell us) who acknowledge a dog as their king, they must 
interpret its bark and its movements as having some definite meaning.- [A] We ought 
to note the parity there is between us. We have some modest understanding of what they 
mean: they have the same of us, in about equal measure. They fawn on us, threaten us 
and entreat us - as we do them. Meanwhile we discover that they manifestly have 
converse between themselves, both whole and entire: they understand each other, not 
only within one species but across different species. 


[B] Et mutae pecudes et denique secla ferarum 
Dissimiles suerunt voces variasque cluere, 

Cum metus aut dolor est, aut cum jam gaudia gliscunt. 


[And dumb cattle and, finally, the generations of wild beasts customarily make 
sounds having various meanings, when they feel fear or pain or when joy overflows.]- 

[A] A horse knows there to be anger in a given bark of a dog; but that horse does 
not take fright when the same dog makes some other meaningful cry. Even in beasts 
who cannot utter meaningful sounds we can readily conclude that there is some other 
means of communication between them, from the way they work purposefully together; 
[C] their very movements serve as arguments and ideas. 


[B] Non alia longe ratione atque ipsa videtur 
Protrahere ad gestum pueros infantia linguae. 


[In a not dissimilar way, the very inability to speak leads infants to make gestures. ]- 

[A] And why not? Our deaf-mutes have discussions and arguments, telling each other 
stories by means of signs.- I have seen some who are so nimble and so practised at this 
that they truly lack nothing necessary for making themselves perfectly understood. After 
all, lovers quarrel, make it up again, beg favours, give thanks, arrange secret meetings 
and say everything, with their eyes. 


479 


[Al] E’l silentio ancor suole 
Haver prieghi e parole. 


[Silence itself can talk and beg requests.]— 

[C] And what about our hands? With them we request, promise, summon, dismiss, 
menace, pray, supplicate, refuse, question, show astonishment, count, confess, repent, 
fear, show shame, doubt, teach, command, incite, encourage, make oaths, bear witness, 
make accusations, condemn, give absolution, insult, despise, defy, provoke, flatter, 
applaud, bless, humiliate, mock, reconcile, advise, exalt, welcome, rejoice, lament; show 
sadness, grieve, despair; astonish, cry out, keep silent and what not else, with a variety 
and multiplicity rivalling the tongue. 

What of the head? We summon, dismiss, admit, reject, deny, welcome, honour, 
venerate, disdain, request, refuse, rejoice, lament, fondle, tease, submit, brave, exhort, 
menace, affirm and inquire. 

And what of our eyebrows or our shoulders? None of their movements fails to talk a 
meaningful language which does not have to be learned, a language common to us all. 
This suggests (given the variety and different usage among spoken languages) that it is, 
rather, sign-language that should be judged the ‘property’ of Man.- 

I shall leave aside what Necessity can suddenly teach men in individual cases of 
particular need, as well as finger-alphabets, grammars of gesture and those branches of 
learning conducted and expressed through them and, finally, those peoples who, 
according to Pliny, have no other tongue.- [B] An ambassador from the city of Abdera, 
after delivering a long address to King Agis of Sparta, asked him: ‘Sire, what reply do 
you want me to bear back to our citizens?’ - ‘That I allowed you to say all you wanted, 
for as long as you wanted, without uttering a word.’ Was that not an eloquent and most 
intelligible silence?- 

[A] After all, what aspects of our human competence cannot be found in the 
activities of animals? Is there any form of body politic more ordered, more varied in its 
allocation of tasks and duties or maintained with greater constancy than that of the 
bees? Can we conceive that an allocation of tasks and activities, so striking for its 
orderliness, should be conducted without reasoned discourse and foresight? 


His quidam signis atque haec exempla sequuti, 
Esse apibus partem divinae mentis et haustus 
Aethereos dixere. 


480 


[From such signs and examples men conclude that bees have been given some part of 
the divine Mind and have drunk Aethereal draughts. ]— 

Take the swallows, when spring returns; we can see them ferreting through all the 
comers of our houses; from a thousand places they select one, finding it the most 
suitable place to make their nests: is that done without judgement or discernment? And 
then when they are making their nests (so beautifully and so wondrously woven 
together) can birds use a square rather than a circle, an obtuse angle rather than a right 
angle, without knowing their properties or their effects? Do they bring water and then 
clay without realizing that hardness can be softened by dampening? They cover the 
floors of their palaces with moss or down; do they do so without foreseeing that the 
tender limbs of their little ones will lie more softly there and be more comfortable? Do 
they protect themselves from the stormy winds and plant their dwellings to the eastward, 
without recognizing the varying qualities of those winds and considering that one is 
more healthy for them than another? Why does the spider make her web denser in one 
place and slacker in another, using this knot here and that knot there, if she cannot 
reflect, think or reach conclusions? 

We are perfectly able to realize how superior they are to us in most of their works 
and how weak our artistic skills are when it comes to imitating them. Our works are 
coarser, and yet we are aware of the faculties we use to construct them: our souls use all 
their powers when doing so. Why do we not consider that the same applies to animals? 
Why do we attribute to some sort of slavish natural inclination works that surpass all 
that we can do by nature or by art? 

In this, we thoughtlessly give them a very great superiority over us: we make Nature 
take them by the hand and guide them with a mother’s gentle care in all the actions and 
advantages of their lives; we, on the other hand, are abandoned by Nature to chance and 
to Fortune, obliged to seek, by art, all things necessary for our conservation; meanwhile, 
Nature refuses us the very means which would enable us to reach, by education or 
intelligent application, the level reached by the natural industry of other creatures. In 
this way we make their brutish stupor have every advantage over our divine 
intelligence !— 

In truth, on this account, we would be right to treat Nature as a very unjust 
stepmother. But it is not so. We do not live under so misshapen or so lawless a 
constitution:- Nature clasps all her creatures in a universal embrace; there is not one of 
them which she has not plainly furnished with all means necessary to the conservation 
of its being. 


481 


There are commonplace lamentations which I hear men make (as the unruly liberty 
of their opinions raises them above the clouds and then tumbles them down lower than 
the Antipodes): We are, they say, the only animal abandoned naked on the naked earth; 
we are in bonds and fetters, having nothing to arm or cover ourselves with but the pelts 
of other creatures; Nature has clad all others with shells, pods, husks, hair, wool, spikes, 
hide, down, feathers, scales, fleece or silk, according to the several necessities of their 
being; she has armed them with claws, teeth and horns for assault and defence; and, as is 
proper to them, has herself taught them to swim, to run, to fly or to sing. Man, on the 
other hand, without an apprenticeship, does not know how to walk, talk, eat or to do 
anything at all but wail:- 


[B] Turn porro puer, ut saevis projectus ab undis 
Navita, nudus humi jacet, infans, indigus omni 
Vitali auxilio, cum primum in luminis oras 
Nixibus ex alvo matris natura profudit; 

Vagituque locum lugubri complet, ut aequum est 
Cui tantum in vita restet transire malorum. 

At variae crescunt pecudes, armenta, feraeque, 

Nec crepitacula eis opus est, nec cuiquam adhibenda est 
Almae nutricis blanda atque infracta loquella; 

Nec varias quaerunt vestes pro tempore coeli; 

Denique non armis opus est, non moenibus aids, 

Queis sua tutentur, quando omnibus omnia large 
Tellus ipsa parit, naturaque deadala rerum. 


[Then the child, like a sailor cast up by raging seas, lies naked on the earth, unable to 
talk, bereft of everything that would help him to live, when Nature first tears him 
struggling from his mother’s womb and casts him on the shore of light. He fills the place 
with his mournful cries - rightly, for one who still has to pass through so many evils. Yet 
all sorts of cattle, farm animals as well as wild beasts, thrive; they need no rattles nor the 
winsome baby language of the gentle nurse; they do not need clothing varying with the 
weather; and finally they need no weapons nor lofty walls to make them safe, since 
Earth herself and skilful Nature give all of them, amply, everything they need.]- 

[A] Such plaints are false. There are more uniform relationships and greater fairness 
in the constitution of this world.- Our skin, like theirs, is adequately provided with 
means to resist intemperate weather with firmness: witness those many peoples who 
have yet to acquire a taste for clothing. [B] Our ancient Gauls wore hardly any clothes: 
nor do the Irish, our neighbours, under a sky so cold. 

[A] But we can judge that from ourselves; all parts of the body which we are 
pleased to leave uncovered to air and wind prove able to endure it: face, feet, hands, 


482 


legs, shoulders, head, as custom suggests. If there be a part of us so weak that it does 
seem that it has to fear the cold it is our belly, in which digestion takes place: yet our 
forefathers left it uncovered - and in our society ladies (however soft and delicate they 
are) occasionally go about with it bare down to the navel. Binding and swaddling up 
children is not necessary. The mothers of Sparta used to bring up their children with 
complete freedom of movement for their limbs, without binders or fastenings.- Infant 
cries are common to most other animals; nearly all can be seen wailing and whining 
long after they are born; such behaviour is quite appropriate to the helplessness that they 
feel. As for eating, it is natural to us and to them; it does not have to be learned. 


[B] Sent it enim vim quisque suam quam possit abuti. 


[For every creature feels the powers at its disposal.]— 


[A] Does anyone doubt that a child, once able to feed himself, would know how to go 
in search of food? And Earth, with no farming and with none of our arts, produces quite 
enough for his needs and offers it to him - perhaps not at all seasons, but neither does 
she do that for the beasts: witness the stores we can see ants or others provide for the 
barren season of the year. Those peoples we have recently discovered, so abundantly 
furnished with food and natural drinks needing no care or toil, have taught us that there 
is other food beside bread and that Mother Nature can provide us plenteously, without 
ploughing, with all we need - indeed (as is likely) more straightforwardly and more 
richly than she does nowadays, when we have brought in our artificial skills. 


Et telhts nitidas fruges vinetaque laeta 
Sponte sua primum mortalibus ipsa creavit; 

Ipsa dedit dulces foetus et pabula laeta , 

Quae nunc vix nostro grandescunt aucta labore, 
Conterimusque boves et vires agricolarum. 


[And Earth herself first willingly provided grain and cheerful vines; she gave sweet 
produce and good pastures, such as, with all our increased toil, we can but scarcely 
make to grow; we wear out oxen and the strength of farmers.. 

The lawless flood of our greed outstrips everything we invent to try and slake it. 

As for armaments, we have more natural ones than most other animals do, as well as 
a greater variety in our movements; we draw greater service from them, too - naturally, 


483 


without being taught. Men trained to fight naked throw themselves into danger just as 
our men do. Although some beasts are better armed than we are, we are better armed 
than others. And we are given to covering the body with acquired means of protection 
because Nature teaches us to do so instinctively. 

To see that this is true, note how the elephant sharpens to a point the teeth which it 
uses to fight with (for it has special teeth reserved for fighting, and never used for other 
tasks); when bulls come out to fight they throw up dust and scatter it round about; wild 
boars whet their tusks; and the ichneumon, before coming to grips with the crocodile, 
takes mud, kneaded and compressed, and smears it over itself as a crust to serve as 
body-armour. Why do we not say, therefore, that arming ourselves with sticks and iron 
bars is equally natural?- 

As for the power of speech, it is certain that, if it is not natural, then it cannot be 
necessary. And yet I believe (though it would be difficult to assay it) that if a child, 
before learning to talk, were brought up in total solitude, then he would have some sort 
of speech to express his concepts; it is simply not believable that Nature has refused to 
us men a faculty granted to most other animals; we can see they have means of 
complaining, rejoicing, calling on each other for help or inviting each other to love; they 
do so by meaningful utterances: if that is not talking, what is it? [B] How could they fail 
to talk among themselves, since they talk to us and we to them? How many ways we 
have of speaking to our dogs and they of replying to us! We use different languages 
again, and make different cries, to call birds, pigs, bulls and horses; we change idiom 
according to each species. 


[AI] Cosi per entro loro schiera bruna 
S’ammusa Vuna con I’altra formica 
Forse a spiar lor via, e lor fortuna. 


[As one ant from their dark battalion stops to talk to another, perhaps asking the way 
or how things are faring.] 

And does not Lactantius appear to attribute not only speech to animals, but laughter 
too? 

[A] The different varieties of speech found among men of different countries can be 
paralleled in animals of the same species. On this subject Aristotle cites the ways in 
which the call of the partridge varies from place to place. 


[B] variaeque volucres 
Longe alias alio jaciunt in tempore voces, 


484 


Et partim mutant cum tempestatibus una 
Raucisonos cantus. 


[At different times some birds utter highly different sounds, some even making their 
songs more raucous with changes in the weather.] 

[A] But we do not know what language an isolated child would actually speak and 
the guesses made about it all seem improbable.- 

If anyone challenges my opinion, citing the fact that people who are born deaf never 
learn to talk at all, I have an answer to that: it is not simply because they are unable to 
receive instruction in speech through the ear but rather because of the intimate 
relationship which exists between the faculty of hearing (the power they are deprived of) 
and the faculty of speech, which are by their nature closely sutured together. Whenever 
we talk, we must first talk as it were to ourselves: our speech first sounds in our own 
ears, then we utter it into the ears of other people. 

I have gone into all this to emphasize similarities with things human, so bringing 
Man into conformity with the majority of creatures. We are neither above them nor 
below them. ‘Everything under the Sky’, said the Wise Man, ‘runs according to like laws 
and fortune.- 


[B] Indupedita suis fatalibus omnia vinclis. 


[All things are enchained in the fetters of their destiny.] 


[A] Some difference there is: there are orders and degrees: but always beneath the 
countenance of Nature who is one and the same. 


[B] res quaeque suo ritu procedit, et omnes 
Foedere naturae certo discrimina servant. 


[Each thing proceeds after its own manner, and all things maintain their distinctive 
qualities by the fixed compact of Nature.]- 

[A] Man must be restrained, with his own rank, within the boundary walls of this 
polity: the wretch has no stomach for effectively clambering over them; he is trussed up 
and bound, subject to the same restraints as the other creatures of his natural order. His 
condition is a very modest one. As for his essential being, he has no true privilege or 
pre-eminence: what he thinks or fancies he has, has no savour, no body to it. Granted 


485 


that, of all the animals, Man alone has freedom to think and such unruly ways of doing 
so that he can imagine things which are and things which are not, imagine his wishes, or 
the false and the true! but he has to pay a high price for this advantage - and he has little 
cause to boast about it, since it is the chief source of the woes which beset him: sin, 
sickness, irresolution, confusion and despair. 

To get back to the subject, there is, I say, no rational likelihood that beasts are 
forced to do by natural inclination the selfsame things which we do by choice and 
ingenuity. From similar effects we should conclude that there are similar faculties. 
Consequently, we should admit that animals employ the same method and the same 
reasoning as ourselves when we do anything.- Why should we think that they have inner 
natural instincts different from anything we experience in ourselves? Added to which, it 
is more honourable that we be guided towards regular, obligatory behaviour by the 
natural and ineluctable properties of our being: that is more God-like than rash and 
fortuitous freedom; it is safer to leave the driver’s reins in Nature’s hands, not ours. Our 
empty arrogance makes us prefer to owe our adequacies to our selves rather than to the 
bounty of Nature; we prefer to lavish the natural goods on other animals, giving them up 
so as to flatter and honour ourselves with acquired properties. We do that, it seems to 
me, out of some simple-minded humour. Personally I value graces which are mine since 
I was bom with them more than those which I have had to beg and borrow as an 
apprentice. It is not within our power to acquire a higher recommendation than to be 
favoured by God and Nature. 

Consider the fox which Thracians employ when they want to cross the ice of a 
frozen river; with this end in view they let it loose. Were we to see it stopping at the 
river’s edge, bringing its ear close to the ice to judge from the noise how near to the 
surface the current is running; darting forward or pulling back according to its estimate 
of the thickness or thinness of the ice, would it not be right to conclude that the same 
reasoning passes through its head as would pass through ours and that it ratiocinates and 
draws consequences by its natural intelligence like this: ‘That which makes a noise is 
moving; that which moves is not frozen; that which is not frozen is liquid; that which is 
liquid bends under weight’? Attributing all that exclusively to its keen sense of hearing, 
without any reasoning or drawing of consequences on the part of the fox, is unthinkable, 
a chimera. The same judgement should apply to all the ingenious ruses by which beasts 
protect themselves from our schemes against them. 

Should we pride ourself on our ability to capture them and make them work for us? 
But that is no more than the advantage we have over each other: our slaves are in the 
same condition. [B] Were not the Climacides Syrian slave-women who went down on all 


486 


fours to serve as steps or ladders for the ladies to climb up into their coaches? [A] Even 
the majority of free men and women, for very slight advantages, place themselves in the 
power of others. [C] Thracian wives and concubines beg to be selected for slaughter 
over the dead husband’s tomb. [A] Have tyrants ever failed to find men sworn and 
devoted to them - even though some require them to follow them in death as in life? [B] 
Whole armies have been bound to their captains that way. 

The form of oath used in that rough school which trained gladiators to fight to the 
finish included the vows: ‘We swear to let ourselves be fettered, burned, beaten or killed 
by the sword, suffering all that true gladiators suffer at the hands of their Master’; they 
most scrupulously bound themselves, body and soul, to his service: 


Ure meum, si vis, flamma caput, et pete ferro 
Corpus, et intorto verbere terga seca. 


[Burn my head, if you will, with fire, plunge your iron sword through my body or 
lash my back with your twisted thongs.] 

It was a real, binding undertaking. And yet, one year, ten thousand men were found 
to enter that school and perish there. 

[C] When the Scythians buried their king, over his body they strangled his favourite 
concubine, his cup-bearer, his ostler, his chamberlain, the guard to his bedchamber and 
his cook. And on the anniversary of his death they would take fifty pages mounted on 
fifty horses and kill them, impaling them from behind, from spine to throat, and leaving 
them dead on parade about his tomb.- 

[A] The men who serve us do so more cheaply than our falcons, our horses or our 
hounds; and they are less carefully looked after - [C] what menial tasks will we not bow 
to for the convenience of those animals! The most abject slaves, it seems to me, will not 
willingly do for their masters what princes are proud to do for such creatures. When 
Diogenes saw his parents striving to purchase his freedom he exclaimed: ‘They must be 
fools: my Master looks after me and feeds me; he is my servant !’ 11 So too those who 
keep animals can be said to serve them, not be served by them. 

[A] There is as well a nobility in animals such that, from want of courage, no lion 
has ever been enslaved to another lion; no horse to another horse. We go out to hunt 
animals: lions and tigers go out to hunt men; each beast practises a similar sport against 
another: hounds against hares; pike against tenches; swallows against grasshoppers; 
sparhawks against blackbirds and skylarks: 


487 


[B] serpente ciconia pullos 
Nutrit, et inventa per devia rura lacerta, 

Et leporem aut capream famulae Jovis, et generosae 
In saltu venantur aves. 


[The stork feeds her young on snakes and on lizards found in trackless country 
places; eagles, those noble birds, servants of Jupiter, hunt hares and roes in the 
forests. ]— 

We share the fruits of the chase with our hounds and our hawks, as well as its skill 
and hardships. In Thrace, above Amphipolis, huntsmen and wild falcons each share a 
half of the booty, very exactly, just as the fisherman by the marshes of the Sea of Azov 
sets aside, in good faith, half of his catch for the wolves: if not, they go and tear his nets. 

[A] We have a kind of hunting conducted more with cunning than with force, as 
when we use gin-traps, hooks and lines. Similar things are found among beasts. 
Aristotle relates that the cuttle-fish casts a line of gut from its neck, pays it out and lets 
it float. When it wants to, it draws it in. It spots some little fish approaching, remains 
hiding in the sand or mud and allows it to nibble at the end of the gut and gradually 
draws it in until that little fish is so close it can pounce on it. 

As for force, no animal in the world is liable to so many shocks as Man. No need for 
a whale, an elephant, a crocodile or animals like that, any one of which can destroy a 
great number of men. Lice were enough to make Sylla’s dictatorship vacant; and the 
heart and life-blood of a great and victorious Emperor serve as breakfast for some tiny 
worm. 

Why do we say, in the case of Man, that distinguishing plants which are useful for 
life or for medicines from those which are not (recognizing, say, the virtues of rhubarb 
or polypody) is a sign that he has scientific knowledge based on skill and reason? Yet 
the goats of Candia can be seen picking out dittany from a million other plants when 
they are wounded by spears; if a tortoise swallows a viper it at once goes in search of 
origanum as a purge; the dragon wipes its eyes clear and bright with fennel; storks give 
themselves salt-water enemas; elephants can remove darts and javelins thrown in battle 
from their own bodies, from those of their fellows and even from those of their masters 
(witness the elephant of that King Porus who was killed by Alexander); they do so with 
more skill than we ever could while causing so little pain. Why do we not call it 
knowledge and discretion in their case? To lower them in esteem we allege that Nature 
alone is their Schoolmaster; but that is not to deprive them of knowledge or wisdom: it 
is to attribute them to them more surely than to ourselves, out of respect for so certain a 
Teacher. 


488 


In all other cases Chrysippus was as scornful a judge of the properties of animals as 
any philosopher there ever was, yet he watched the actions of a dog which came upon 
three crossroads - it was either looking for its master or chasing some game fleeing 
before it; it tried first one road then a second; then, having made sure that neither of 
them bore any trace of what it was looking for, it charged down the third road without 
hesitation. Chrysippus was forced to admit that that dog at least reasoned this way: ‘I 
have tracked my master as far as these crossroads; he must have gone down one of these 
three paths; not this one; not that one; so, inevitably, he must have gone down this other 
one.’ Convinced by this reasoned conclusion, it did not sniff at the third path; it made no 
further investigations but let itself be swayed by the power of reason. Here was pure 
dialectic: the dog made use of disjunctive and copulative propositions and adequately 
enumerated the parts. Does it matter whether he learned all this from himself or from 
the Dialectica of George of Trebizond? 

Yet beasts, like us, are not incapable of instruction. Blackbirds, ravens, magpies and 
parrots can be taught to speak:- we recognize in them a capacity for making their voice 
and their breath subtle and pliant enough for us to mould and restrict them to a definite 
number of letters and syllables. That capacity witnesses to an inward power of reasoning 
which makes them teachable - and willing to learn. We have all had our fill I expect of 
the sort of monkey-tricks which minstrels teach their dogs to do: those dances in which 
they never miss a note they hear or those varied jumps and movements which they 
perform on command. But I am much more moved to wonder by the action of the 
guide-dogs used by the blind in town and country, common enough as they are. I have 
watched those dogs stop at certain doors where people regularly give alms, and seen 
how, even when there is room enough to squeeze through themselves, they still avoid 
encounters with carts and coaches; I have seen one, following the town trench but 
abandoning a level, even path for a worse one, in order to keep its master away from the 
ditch. How was that dog brought to realize that it was its duty to neglect its own interests 
and to serve its master? How does it know that a path might be wide enough for itself 
but not wide enough for a blind man? Could all that be grasped without thought and 
reasoning? 

I should not overlook what Plutarch tells us about a dog he saw with the elder 
Vespasian, the Emperor, in the theatre of Marcellus in Rome. This dog served a juggler 
who was putting on a play with several scenes and several parts. The dog had its own 
part: it had to pretend, among other things, to swallow some poison and to lie dead for a 
while. First it swallowed the supposedly poisoned bread; then it began to shake and 
tremble as though it were dizzy; finally, it lay down and stiffened as though it were dead. 
It let itself be pulled about and dragged from one place to another, as the plot required. 


489 


Then, when it knew the time was right, it began to stir very gently, as though awakening 
from a deep sleep and raised its head, looking from side to side in a way which made the 
audience thunderstruck. 

Oxen were used to water the Royal Gardens of Susa: they had to draw up the water 
by turning large wheels with buckets attached - you can see plenty of them in 
Languedoc. Each one had been ordered to do one hundred turns of the wheel a day. 
They grew so used to this number that nothing would force them to do one more; when 
their alloted task had been done they stopped dead. Yet we have reached adolescence 
before we can count up to a hundred; and we have just discovered peoples with no 
knowledge of numbers at all. 

You need still greater powers of reason to teach others than to be taught yourself. 
Democritus thought, and proved, that we had been taught most of our arts by animals: 
the spider taught us to weave and to sew and the swallow to build; the swan and 
nightingale taught us music and many other animals taught us by imitation the practice 
of medicine. Moreover, Aristotle maintains that nightingales teach their young to sing, 
spending time and trouble doing so: that explains why the song of nightingales brought 
up in cages, with no freedom to be schooled by their parents, loses much of its charm. 
[B] From that we may conclude that any improvement is due to learning and study. 

Even nightingales born free do not all sing one and the same song: each one sings 
according to its capacity to leam. They make jealous classmates, squabbling and vying 
with each other so heartily that the vanquished sometimes drops down dead, not from 
lack of song but lack of breath. The youngest birds ruminate thoughtfully and then 
begin to imitate snatches of song; the pupils listen to the lessons of their tutors and then 
give an account of themselves, taking it in turns to stop their singing. You can hear their 
faults being corrected; some of the criticisms of their tutors are perceptible even to us. 

Arrius- said that he once saw an elephant with cymbals hanging from each thigh 
and a third on its trunk; the other elephants danced round in a ring, rising and falling to 
the cadences of this musical instrument, which was harmonious and pleasant to listen to. 
[A] In the great spectacles of Rome it was quite usual to see elephants trained to execute 
dance steps to the sound of the human voice; such performances comported several 
intricate movements, interlacings, changes of step and cadenzas, all very hard to learn. 
Some were seen revising their lessons in private, practising and studying so as to avoid 
being beaten or scolded by their masters. 

But strange indeed is the account of a female magpie vouched for by Plutarch, no 
less. It lived in a barber’s shop in Rome and was wonderfully clever at imitating any 
sounds it heard. It happened one day that some musicians stopped quite a while in front 


490 


of the shop, blasting away on their trumpets. Immediately the magpie fell pensive, mute 
and melancholic, remaining so all the following day. Everyone marvelled, thinking that 
the blare of the trumpets had frightened and confused it, making it lose both hearing 
and song at the same time. But they eventually found that it had been deeply meditating 
and had withdrawn into itself; it had been inwardly practising, preparing its voice to 
imitate the noise of those trumpeters. The first sound it did make was a perfect 
imitation of their changes, repetitions and stops; after this new apprenticeship it quit 
with disdain all that it was able to do before. 

I do not want to leave out another example of a dog, also seen by Plutarch. (I realize 
I am digressing, showing no sense of order, but I can no more observe order when 
arranging these examples than I can in the rest of my work.) Plutarch was on board ship 
when he saw a dog which wanted to lap up some oil in the bottom of a jar; it could not 
get its tongue right down into the vessel because the neck was too narrow, so it went in 
search of pebbles which it dropped into the jar until the oil rose near to the top where it 
could get at it. What is that if not the actions of a very subtle intelligence? It is said that 
Barbary ravens do the same when the water they want to drink is too low to get at. 

The above action is somewhat akin to what is related by Juba (a king in elephant 
country): hunters cunningly prepare deep pits hidden beneath a cover of undergrowth; 
when an elephant is trapped in one, its fellows promptly bring a great many sticks and 
stones to help it clamber out. 

But so many of their actions bring elephants close to human capacities that if I 
wanted to relate in detail everything that experience has shown us about them, I would 
easily win one of my regular arguments: that there is a greater difference between one 
man and another than between some men and some beasts. 

An elephant-driver in a private household in Syria used to steal half the allotted 
rations at every feed. One day the master himself wanted to attend to things; he tipped 
into the elephant’s manger the right measure of barley, as prescribed. The elephant 
glared at its driver and, with its trunk, set half the ration aside, to reveal the wrong done 
to it. Another elephant, whose driver used to adulterate its feed with stones, went up to 
the pot where he was stewing meat for his own dinner and filled it with ashes. Those are 
special cases, but we all know from eye-witnesses that the strongest elements in the 
armies based in the Levant were elephants; their effectiveness surpassed what we can 
obtain nowadays from our artillery, which more or less replaces elephants in line of 
battle (as can be easily judged by those who know their ancient history). 


[B] siquiclem Tirio servire solebant 


491 



Annibali, et nostris ducibus, regique Molosso, 
Horum majores, et dorso ferre cohortes, 

Partem aliquam belli et euntem in praelia turmam. 


[Their sires served Hannibal of Carthage, as well as our generals and the Molossian 
King, bearing on their backs into the fray cohorts and squadrons, and taking part in the 
battle themselves.]— 

[A] To make over to them like this the vanguard of their army soldiers must have 
seriously relied on the trustworthiness of these beasts and on their powers of reason; 
because of their size and bulk the slightest stoppage on their part or else the slightest 
panic making them head back towards their own side would be enough to undo 
everything. There are fewer examples of their turning and charging their own troops 
than of us men charging back on each other in rout. They were entrusted not with one 
simple manoeuvre but with several different roles in combat. 

[B] The Spaniards, likewise, employed dogs in their recent conquest of the 
American Indies; they paid them like, soldiers and gave them a share in the booty. 
Those animals displayed eagerness and fierceness but no less skill and judgement, 
whether in pursuing victory or in knowing when to stop, in charging or withdrawing as 
appropriate, and in telling friend from foe.- 

[A] Much more than everyday things, far-off things move us to wonder; they 
impress us more; otherwise I would not have spent so much time over this long 
catalogue; for, in my opinion, anyone who took careful note of the everyday animals we 
see living among us would find them doing things just as astonishing as the examples we 
gather from far-off times and places. - [C] Nature is One and constant in her course. 
Anybody who could adequately understand her present state could draw reliable 
conclusions about all the future and all the past. 

[A] I once saw men brought to us from distant lands overseas. We could understand 
nothing of their language; their manners and even their features and clothing were far 
different from ours. Which of us did not take them for brutes and savages? Which of us 
did not attribute their silence to dullness and brutish ignorance? After all, they knew no 
French, were unaware of our hand-kissings and our low and complex bows, our bearing 
and our behaviour - such things must, of course, serve as a pattern for the whole human 
race... 

Everything which seems strange we condemn, as well as everything we do not 
understand; that applies to our judgements on animals. Many of their characteristics are 
related to ours; that enables us to draw conjectures from comparisons. But they also 


492 


have qualities peculiar to themselves: what can we know about that? Horses, dogs, 
cattle, sheep, birds and most other animals living among men recognize our voices and 
are prepared to obey them. Why, Crassus even had a lamprey which came to him when 
he called it, and there are eels in the fountain of Arethusa which do the same. [B] I have 
seen stews in plenty where the fish, on hearing a particular cry from those who tend 
them, all rush to be fed. 


[A] nomen habent, et ad magistri 
Vocem quisque sui venit citatus. 


[They have a name and each comes to its master when he calls them.] 


78 


Such evidence we can judge. 

We can also go on to say that elephants have some notion of religion since, after 
ablutions and purifications, they can be seen waving their trunks like arms upraised, 
while gazing intently at the rising sun; for long periods at fixed times in the day (by 
instinct, not from teaching or precept) they stand rooted in meditation and 
contemplation; there may be no obvious similarities in other animals, but that does not 
allow us to make judgements about their total lack of religion. When matters are hidden 
from us, we cannot in any way conceive them. 

We can partly do so in the case of an activity noticed by Cleanthes the philosopher, 
because it resembles our own. He saw, he said, ants leave their own ant-hill for another 
one, bearing the body of a dead ant. Several others came out to meet them, as if to 
parley. They remained together for some time; then the second group of ants went back 
to consult, it was thought, their fellow-citizens. They made two or three such journeys, 
because of hard bargaining. In the end, the newcomers brought a worm out from their 
heap, apparently as a ransom for the dead ant. The first lot loaded it on their shoulders 
and carried it back, leaving the body of the dead ant with the others. 

That is the interpretation given by Cleanthes; it witnesses to the fact that voiceless 
creatures are not deprived of mutual contact and communication; if we cannot share in 
it, that is because of a defect in us; we would be very stupid indeed to have any 
meddlesome opinions on the matter. 

Animals do many actions which surpass our understanding; far from being able to 
imitate them we cannot even conceive them in our thoughts. Many hold that in that last 
great sea-fight which Antony lost against Augustus, the flag-galley was stopped dead in 


493 


its course by the fish which is called Remora (‘Hindrance’) since it has the property of 
hindering any ship it clings to. When the Emperor Caligula was sailing along the coast 
of Romania with a large fleet, his galley alone was pulled up short by this very fish. 
Attached as it was to the bottom of his vessel, he caused it to be seized, angry that so 
small a creature - it is a shellfish - could just cling by its mouth to his galley and outdo 
the combined might of the sea, the winds and all his oarsmen. Understandably, he was 
even more amazed to learn that, once it was brought aboard ship, it no longer had the 
power it had had in the water. 

A citizen of Cyzicum once acquired a reputation as a good mathematical astrologer 
from noticing the practice of the hedgehog: its den is open in various places to various 
winds; it can foretell from which direction the wind will blow and plugs up the hole on 
the windward side. Observing that, he supplied the town with reliable forecasts about 
the direction of the winds. 

The chameleon takes on the colour of its surroundings, but the octopus assumes 
whatever colour it likes to suit the occasion, hiding, say, from something fearful or 
lurking for its prey. The chameleon changes passively, the octopus actively. We change 
hue as well, from fear, anger, shame and other emotions which affect the colour of our 
faces. That happens to us, as to the chameleon, passively. Jaundice, not our will, has the 
power to turn us yellow. 

Such characteristics in other animals which we realize to surpass our own show that 
they have, to an outstanding degree, a faculty which we classify as ‘occult’. Similarly, 
animals probably have many other characteristics and powers [C] which are in no way 
apparent to us. 

[A] Of all the omens of former times, the most ancient and the most certain were 
those drawn from the flight of birds. We have nothing corresponding to that, nothing as 
wonderful. The beatings of the birds’ wings, from which consequences were drawn 
about the future, show rule and order: only some very special means could produce so 
noble an activity: to attribute so great an effect entirely to some ordinance of Nature, 
without any understanding, agreement and thought on the part of the creatures which 
perform it, is to be taken in by words; such an opinion is evidently false. Here is proof 
of that: the torpedo is a fish with the property of benumbing the limbs of anyone who 
directly touches it; in addition it can even send a numbing torpor into the hands of 
anyone touching it or handling it indirectly through a net or something similar. They 
even say that, if you pour water on to it, you can feel this effect working upwards, 
numbing your sense of touch through the water. This force is worth marvelling at, but is 
not without its usefulness to the torpedo; that fish knows it has it and uses it to trap its 


494 



prey when hunting; it snuggles down into the mud: other fish gliding overhead, struck by 
its cold torpor, are benumbed and fall into its power. 

Cranes, swallows and other birds of passage which change dwellings with the 
seasons, clearly show that they are aware of their ability to foretell and put it to good 
use. 

Hunters assure us that the way to choose from a litter the puppy which will turn out 
best is simply to make the bitch choose it herself: take the puppies out of their kennel 
and the first one she brings back will always prove the best; or else make a show of 
putting a ring of fire around their kennel; then take the first puppy she dashes in to 
rescue. From that it is obvious that either bitches have powers of foresight which we 
lack or else that they have a capacity for judging their young which is more lively than 
our own.- 

Beasts are born, reproduce, feed, move, live and die in ways so closely related to our 
own that, if we seek to lower their motivations or to raise our own status above theirs, 
that cannot arise from any reasoned argument on our part. Doctors recommend us to 
live and behave as animals do - and ordinary people have ever said: 


Tenez chauts les pieds et la teste; 
Au demeurant, vivez en beste. 


[Keep feet and head warm: 
Then live like the beasts.] 


Sexual generation is the principal natural action. Our human members are rather 
more conveniently arranged for that purpose; and yet we are told that if we want to be 
really effective we should adopt the position and posture of the animals: 


more ferarum 

Quadrupedumque magis ritu, plerumque putantur 
Concipere uxores; quia sic loca sumere possunt, 
Pectoribus positis, sublatis semina lumbis. 


[Most think that wives conceive more readily in the posture of wild animals and four- 
footed beasts; that is because the semen can find its way better when the breasts are low 
down and the loins up-raised.] 

[AI] All those immodest and shameless movements that women have invented out of 


495 


their own heads are condemned as positively harmful; women are advised to return to 
the more modest and poised comportment of animals of their sex. 


Nam mulier prohibet se concipere citque repugnat, 
Clunibus ipsa viri Venerem si laeta retractet, 

Atque exossato ciet omni pectore fluctus. 

Ejicit enim sulci recta regione viaque 
Vomerem, atque locis avertit seminis ictum. 


[For the woman hinders or averts conception when passion leads her to withdraw 
Venus and her buttocks from the man, diverting the flow entirely over her yielding belly; 
she makes the plough-share leap out of its furrow and broadcasts the seed where it does 
not belong.]- 

[A] If justice consists in rendering everyone his due, then animals which serve, love 
and protect those that treat them well and which attack strangers and those that do them 
harm show some resemblance to aspects of our own justice; as they also do by 
maintaining strict fair-shares for their young. 

As for loving affection, theirs is incomparably more lively and consistent than men’s. 
King Lisimachus had a dog called Hircanus. When its master died it remained 
stubbornly by his bed, refusing to eat or drink; when the day came to cremate the body, 
it ran dashing into the fire and was burned to death. The dog of a man called Pyrrhus 
did the same: from the moment he died it would not budge off its master’s bed, and 
when they bore the body away, it let itself be carried off too, finally throwing itself into 
the pyre as they were burning its master’s corpse. 

There are also inclinations where our affection arises not from reasoned counsel but 
by that random chance sometimes called sympathy. Animals are capable of it too. We 
can see horses grown so attracted to each other that we can hardly get them to live or 
travel apart. We can see them attracted to a particular kind of coat among their fellow 
horses, as we are to particular faces; whenever they come across it they straightway 
approach it with pleasure and display their affection, whereas they dislike or hate a 
different kind of coat. 

Animals, like us, have a choice of partners and select their females. Nor are they 
free from our jealousies and great irreconcilable hatreds. 

Desires are either natural and necessary, like eating and drinking; natural and not 
necessary, such as mating with a female; or else neither natural nor necessary, like 
virtually all human ones, which are entirely superfluous and artificial. Nature needs 
wonderfully little to be satisfied and leaves little indeed for us to desire. The activities of 


496 


our kitchens are not Nature’s ordinance. Stoics say that a man could feed himself on one 
olive a day. The choiceness of our wines owes nothing to Nature’s teachings, any more 
than do the refinements we load on to our sexual appetites: 


neque ilia 

Magno prognatwn deposcit consule cunnum. 


[That does not demand a cunt descended from some great consul.]— 

False opinions and ignorance of the good have poured so many strange desires into 
us that they have chased away almost all the natural ones, no more nor less than if a 
multitude of strangers in a city drove out all the citizens who were born there, snuffed 
out their ancient power and authority, seized the town and entirely usurped it. 

Animals obey the rules of Nature better than we do and remain more moderately 
within her prescribed limits - though not so punctiliously as to be without something 
akin to our debaucheries. Just as there have been mad desires driving humans to fall in 
love with beasts, so beasts have fallen in love with us, admitting monstrous passions 
across species: witness the elephant which was the rival of Aristophanes the 
Grammarian for the affection of a young Alexandrian flower-girl and which was every 
bit as dutiful in its passion as he was: when walking through the fruit market it took fruit 
in its trunk and brought it to her. It never took its eyes off her except when it had to and 
sometimes slipped its trunk into her bosom through her neckband and stroked her 
breasts. We are also told of a dragon which fell in love with a maiden; of a goose 
enamoured of a boy in the town of Asopus, and of a ram which sighed for Glaucia the 
minstrel-girl - and baboons falling madly in love with women are an everyday 
occurrence. You can also see some male animals falling for males of their own kind. 

Oppianus- and others relate some examples to show that beasts in their couplings 
respect the laws of kinship, but experience frequently shows us the contrary: 


nee habetur turpe juvencae 
Ferre patrem tergo; fit equo sua filia conjux; 
Quasque creavit init pecudes caper; ipsaque cujus 
Semine concepta est, ex illo concipit ales. 


[The heifer feels no shame if covered by the sire nor does the mare; the billy-goat 
goes on to the nanny-goats he has fathered, and birds conceive from the semen that 


497 


begot them.]- 

Has there ever been a more express case of subtle malice than that of the mule of 
Thales the philosopher? Laden with salt, it chanced to stumble when fording a river, so 
wetting the sacks; noticing that the salt dissolved and lightened its load, it never failed, 
whenever it could, to plunge fully loaded into a stream. Eventually its master discovered 
its trick and ordered it to be laden with wool. Finding its expectations deceived, it gave 
up that trick. 

Some animals so naturally mirror the face of human avarice that you can see them 
stealing anything they can and hiding it carefully, even though they never have any use 
for it. 

As for household management beasts surpass us in the foresight necessary to gather 
and store for the future, and also possess many of the kinds of knowledge required to do 
so. When ants notice their grain or seeds going mouldy and smelling badly, they stop 
them from spoiling or going rotten by spreading them on the ground outside their 
storehouses, airing, drying and freshening them up. But the measures and precautions 
they take to gnaw out their grains of corn surpass any imaginable human foresight. Corn 
does not always stay dry and wholesome but gets soft, flabby and milky, as a step 
towards germinating and sprouting anew; to stop it turning to seed-corn and losing its 
nature and properties as grain in store for future use, ants gnaw off the end which does 
the sprouting. 

As for war - the most grandiose and glorious of human activities - I would like to 
know whether we want to use it to prove our superiority or, on the contrary, to prove 
our weakness and imperfection. We know how to defeat and kill each other, to 
undermine and destroy our own species: not much there, it seems, to make them want to 
learn from us. 


[B] quando leoni 

Fortior eripuit vitam leo? quo nemore unquam 
Expiravit aper majoris dentibus apri? 


[When has a stronger lion ever torn life from a weaker lion? In what woodlands has a 
wild boar ever died at the teeth of a stronger?] M 

[A] They are not universally free from this, though - witness the furious encounters 
of bees and the enterprises of their monarchs in the opposing armies: 


saepe duobus 


498 


Regibus incessit magno discordia motu, 
Continuoque animos vulgi et trepidantia bello 
Corda licet longe praesciscere. 


[Often there arises great strife between two King bees; great movements are afoot; 
you may imagine the passion and the warlike frenzy which animates the populace. ]— 

I can never read that inspired account without thinking that I am reading a 
description of human vanity and ineptitude. 

The deeds of those warriors which ravish us with their horror and their terror; those 
tempestuous sounds and cries: 


[B] Fulgur ibi ad coelum se tollit, totaque circum 
Aere renidescit tellus, subterque virurn vi 
Excitur pedibus sonitus, clamoreque montes 
Icti rejectant voces ad sidera mundi; 


[There, armour glitters up to heaven and all the surrounding fields shimmer with 
bronze; the earth shakes beneath the soldiers’ tread; the mountains re-echo to the stars 
above, the clamour striking against them;]- 

[A] that dread array of thousands upon thousands of soldiers bearing arms; such 
bravery, ardour, courage: be pleased to consider the pretexts, many and vain, which set 
them in motion and the pretexts, many and frivolous, which make them cease. 


Paridis propter narratur amorem 
Graecia Barbariae diro collisa duello. 


[They narrate how Greece, for the love of Paris, made fatal war against the 
Barbarians. ]- 

It was because of the lechery of Paris that all Asia was ruined and destroyed: one 
man’s desires, the annoyance and pleasure of one man, one single family quarrel - 
causes which ought not to suffice to set two fishwives clawing at each other’s throats - 
were the soul, the motive-force, of that great discord. 

Do we want to trust the word of those who were the main authors and prime movers 
of wars like these? Then let us listen to Augustus, the greatest, most victorious and most 
powerful Emperor there ever has been, sporting and jesting (most amusingly and wittily) 
about several battles risked on land and sea, the life and limb of the five hundred 
thousand men who followed his star, and the might and treasure of both parts of the 


499 


Roman world, exhausted in the service of his adventures: 


Quod futuit Glaphyran Antonius, hanc mihi poenam 
Fulvia constiudt, se quoque uti futuam. 

Fulviam ego ut futuam? Quid, si me Manius oret 
Paedicem, faciam ? Non puto, si sapiam. 
Autfutue, aut pugnemus, ait. Quid, si mihi vita 
Charior est ipsa mentula ? Signa canant! 


[Because Antony fucked Glaphyra, Fulvia decided I had to fuck her - as revenge. 
Me, fuck Fulvia! Supposing Manius begged me to bugger him? Not if I can help it! 
‘Fuck or we fight,’ she said. What if my cock is dearer than life to me?... Sound the war 
trumpets!] 

(I quote my Latin with freedom of conscience! You, my Patroness, have given me 
leave. )- 

Now this mighty Body, War, with so many facets and movements, which seems to 
threaten both earth and heaven - 


[B] Quam multi Lybico volvuntur marmore fluctus, 
Saevus ubi Orion hybernis conditur undis, 

Vel cum sole novo densae torrenUir aristae, 

Aut Hermi campo, aut Lyciae flaventibus arvis, 

Scuta sonant, pulsuque pedum tremit excita tellus. 


[As the waves innumerable which roll in the Libyan sea, when fierce Orion plunges 
into the billows as winter returns; or, as when the summer sun bakes the thick shooting 
com on the plains of Hermus or the golden fields of Lycia: so clash the shields, and the 
stricken land trembles beneath their feet] - 

[A] this mad Monster with all its many arms and legs, is only Man: weak, miserable, 
wretched Man. An ant-hill disturbed and hot with rage! 


It nigrum campis agmen. 


OQ 

[The black battalion advances in the plain.]— 


A contrary wind, the croak of a flight of ravens, a stumbling horse, an eagle chancing 
by, a dream, a word, a sign, a morning mist, all suffice to cast him down and bring him 


500 


to the ground. Let a ray of sunlight dazzle him in the face, and there he lies, limp and 
faint. Let a speck of dust blow into his eyes (as our poet Virgil writes of the bees), and 
all our ensigns, all our legions, even with Pompey the Great himself at the head of them, 
are broken and shattered... (I believe it was Pompey who was defeated by Sertorius in 
Spain with such fine arms as these, [B] which also served a turn for others - for 
Eumenes against Antigonus, and for Surena against Crassus: 


[A] Hi motus animorum atque haec certamina tanta 
Pulveris exigui jactu compressci quiescent. 


[These passionate commotions and these great battles are calmed down with a 
handful of dust.]- 

[C] Send out a detachment made up of a couple of bees: they will be strong and 
brave enough to topple the Monster of war. We still recall how the Portuguese were 
investing the town of Tamly in their territory of Xiatime when the inhabitants, who had 
hives in plenty, carried a great many of them to their walls and smoked the bees out so 
vigorously that their enemies were unable to sustain their stinging attacks and were all 
put to rout. They owed the freedom of their town and their victory to such novel 
reinforcements - and with so happy an outcome that not one bee was reported 
missing.- 

[A] The souls of Emperors and of cobblers are cast in the same mould. We consider 
the importance of the actions of Princes and their weight and then persuade ourselves 
that they are produced by causes equally weighty, equally important. In that we deceive 
ourselves. They are tossed to and fro by the same principles as we are. The reasons that 
make us take issue with a neighbour lead Princes to start a war; the same reason which 
makes us flog a lackey makes kings lay waste a province. [B] They can do more but can 
wish as lightly. [Al] The same desires trouble a fleshworm and an elephant. 

[A] As for faithfulness, there is no animal in the world whose treachery can compete 
with Man’s. Our history books tell of certain dogs which vigorously reacted to the 
murders of their masters. King Pyrrhus once came across a dog guarding the body of its 
dead master; when he was told the dog had done this duty for three days, he ordered the 
corpse to be buried and took the dog away with him. Later, when he was making a 
general review of his troops the dog recognized the murderers of its master and ran at 
them barking loudly and angrily. This was the first piece of evidence leading to its 
master’s murder being avenged; justice was soon done in the courts. The dog of Hesiod 
the Wise did the same, leading to the sons of Ganistor (a man from Naupactus) being 


501 


convicted of the murder of its master. 

Another dog was guarding a temple in Athens when it spotted a thief sacrilegiously 
making off with the finest jewels. It began barking at him as loud as it could, but the 
temple sextons never woke up; so the dog started to trail the thief and, when day broke, 
hung behind a little without losing him from sight. When the thief offered it food, it 
refused to take anything from him, whilst accepting it from others who passed by, 
treating them all to a good wagging of its tail. When the thief stopped to sleep, so did 
the dog, in the same place. News of this dog reached the sextons of that church; they set 
out to find it; by making enquiries about the colour of its coat, they eventually caught up 
with it at Cromyon. The thief was there too; they brought him back to Athens, where he 
was punished. In recognition of its good sense of duty, the judges awarded the dog a 
fixed measure of wheat out of public funds to pay for its keep and ordered the priests to 
look after it. This happened in Plutarch’s own time and he himself asserts that the 
account was very thoroughly vouched for. 

As for gratitude - and it seems to me that we could well bring this word back into 
repute - one example will suffice. Apion relates it as something he had seen himself. He 
tells how, one day, the people of Rome were given the pleasure of watching several 
strange animals fight - mainly, in fact, unusually big lions; one of these drew the eyes of 
the entire audience by its wild bearing, the strength and size of its limbs and its proud 
and terrifying roar. Amongst the slaves presented to the populace to fight with these 
beasts was Androdus, a slave from Dacia, belonging to a Roman lord of consular rank. 
This lion, seeing him from afar, first pulled up short, as though struck with wonder; it 
then came gently towards him; its manner was soft and peaceful, as if it expected to 
recognize an acquaintance. Then, having made certain of what it was looking for, it 
began to wag its tail as dogs do when fondly greeting their masters; it kissed and licked 
the hands and thighs of that poor wretch, who was beside himself, ecstatic with fear. 
The gracious behaviour of the lion brought Androdus back to himself so that he fixed 
his gaze on it, staring at it and then recognizing it. It was a rare pleasure to see the happy 
greetings and blandishments they lavished on each other. The populace raised shouts of 
joy; the Emperor sent for the slave to leam how this strange event had come about. He 
gave him an account, novel and wonderful: ‘My Master’, he said, ‘was a proconsul in 
Africa; he treated me so cruelly and so harshly, flogging me every day, that I was forced 
to steal myself from him and run away. I found the quickest way to hide myself safely 
from a person having such great Provincial authority was to make for that country’s 
uninhabited sandy deserts, fully resolved, if there was no means of keeping myself in 
food, to kill myself. The midday sun was so fierce and the heat so intolerable that when 
I stumbled on a hidden cave, difficult of access, I plunged into it. Soon afterwards this 


502 



lion came in, its paw all wounded and bloody; it was groaning and whining with pain. I 
was very frightened when it arrived but, when it saw me hiding in a corner of its lair, it 
came gently up to me and showed me its wounded paw, as though asking for help. I 
removed a great splinter of wood; when I had made it a little more used to me, I 
squeezed out the filthy pus that had collected in the wound, wiped it and made it as 
clean as I could. The lion, aware that things were better and that the pain had been 
relieved, began to rest, falling asleep with its paw in my hands. After that we lived 
together in that cave for three whole years; we ate the same food since the lion brought 
me choice morsels of the animals it had killed in the hunt; I had no fire but I fed myself 
by cooking the meat in the heat of the sun. In the end I grew disgusted with this savage, 
brutish life and so, when the lion had gone out one day on its usual quest for food, I 
slipped away. Three days later I was surprised by soldiers who brought me from Africa 
to Rome and handed me over to my master. He promptly condemned me to die by 
being exposed to the beasts in the arena. I realize now that the lion was also captured 
soon afterwards and that it wanted to repay me for my kindness in curing its wound.’ 

That is the account which Androdus told to the Emperor and which he also spread 
from mouth to mouth. Androdus was given his freedom by general acclaim and relieved 
of his sentence; by order of the people he was made a gift of the lion. 

Ever since, says Apion, we can see Androdus leading the lion about on a short leash, 
going from tavern to tavern in Rome collecting money, while the lion lets itself be 
strewn with flowers. All who meet them say: ‘There goes the Lion, host to the Man: 
there goes the Man, doctor to the Lion.’- 


503 


[B] We often shed tears at the loss of animals which we love: they do the same when 
they lose us: 


Post, bellator equus, positis insignibus, Aethon 
It lachrymans, guttisque humectat grandibus ora. 


[Then comes Aethon, the war-horse, stripped of its insignia, weeping and drenching 
its face in mighty tears. ]— 

Some peoples hold their wives in common while in others each man has a wife of 
his own; can we not see the same among the beasts? Do they not have marriages better 
kept than our own? 

[A] As touching the confederations and alliances which animals make to league 
themselves together for mutual succour, oxen, pigs and other animals can be seen 
rushing in to help when one of their number is being attacked and rallying round in its 
defence. If a scar-fish swallows a fisherman’s hook, its fellows swarm around and bite 
through the line; if one of them happens to get caught in a wicker trap, the others dangle 
their tails down into it from outside while it holds on grimly with its teeth. In this way 
they drag it right out. When a barbel-fish is hooked, the others stiffen the spine which 
projects from their backs; it is notched like a saw; they rub it against the line and saw it 
through. 

As for the special duties we render to each other in the service of life, there are 
several similar examples amongst the animals. The whale, it is said, never travels 
without a tiny fish like a sea-gudgeon swimming ahead of it (for this reason it is called a 
‘guide-fish’). The whale follows it everywhere, allowing itself to be directed and steered 
as easily as a rudder turns a boat. Everything else - beast or ship - which falls into the 
swirling chaos of that creature’s mouth is straightway lost and swallowed up: yet that 
little fish can retire there and sleep in its mouth in complete safety. While it is asleep, 
the whale never budges, but as soon as it swims out, the whale constantly follows it; if it 
should chance to lose its guide-fish it flounders about all over the place, often dashing 
itself to pieces against the rocks like a rudderless ship. Plutarch testifies to having seen 
this happen on the island of Anticyra. 

There is a similar companionship between the tiny wren and the crocodile: the wren 
stands guard over that big creature; when the crocodile’s enemy, the ichneumon, closes 
in for a fight, this little bird is afraid that its companion may be caught napping, so it 
pecks it awake and sings to warn it of danger. The wren lives on the leftovers of that 
monstrous crocodile, which welcomes it into its jaws and lets it pick at the meat stuck 


504 


between its teeth. If it wants to shut its mouth it warns the wren to fly out by gradually 
closing its jaws a little, without squashing it or harming it in any way. 

The shellfish called a nacre lives in similar company with the pinnothere, a kind of 
small crab which serves it as tout and doorkeeper; squatting by the orifice which the 
nacre always keeps half-open, it waits until some little fish worth catching swims into it. 
The crab then slips into the nacre, pinching its living flesh to make it close its shell. 
Having imprisoned the fish they both set about eating it. 

Three parts of Mathematics are particularly well known to tunny-fish: the way they 
live shows that. 

First, Astrology; it is they who teach it to men: wherever they may be when 
surprised by the winter solstice, there they remain until the following equinox (which 
explains why even Aristotle readily allows them a knowledge of that science). 

Next Geometry and Arithmetic: tunny-fish always form up in the shape of a cube, 
equally square on all sides. Drawing themselves up into a solid battalion, a corps 
enclosed and protected all round by six faces of equal size, they swim about in this 
order, square before, square behind - so that if you count one line of them you have the 
count of the whole school, since the same figure applies to their depth, breadth and 
length. 

As for greatness of spirit, it would be hard to express it more clearly than that great 
dog did which was sent to King Alexander from India. It was first presented with a stag, 
next with a boar, then with a bear: it did not deign to come out and fight them, but as 
soon as it saw a lion it leaped to its feet, clearly showing that it thought such an animal 
was indeed worthy of the privilege of fighting against it. 

[B] Touching repentance and the acknowledging of error, they tell of an elephant 
which killed its master in a fit of anger; its grief was so intense that it refused to eat and 
starved itself to death. 

[A] As for clemency, they tell of a tiger - the most inhuman of all beasts - which 
was given a goat to eat. It fasted for two days before being even tempted to harm it; by 
the third day, it considered the goat as a familiar guest, so, rather than attack it, it broke 
out of its cage and sought food elsewhere. 

As for rights bred of familiarity and friendly converse, it is quite normal to train 
cats, dogs and hares to live tamely together. 

But surpassing all human imagination is what experience has taught travellers by sea 
- especially those in the sea of Sicily - about the halcyons. Has Nature ever honoured 


505 



any creature as she has honoured these kingfishers in their procreation, lying-in and 
birth? The poets feign that one single island, Delos, was a floating land before being 
anchored so that Latona might give birth upon it. But God himself has wished the entire 
sea to be settled, smooth and calm, free from wave and wind and rain, on those halcyon 
days when these creatures produce their young. (This befalls, precisely, about the 
shortest day of the year, the solstice: this privilege of theirs gives us seven days and 
nights at the very heart of the winter, when, without danger, we can sail the seas.) Each 
female knows no male but its own; it helps it all its life and never forsakes it. If the male 
is weak or crippled the female carries it everywhere on her back, serving it till death. 

But no ingenuity has ever fathomed the miraculous artifice by which the halcyons 
build their nest for their young nor divined its fabric. Plutarch saw several of them and 
handled them. He thinks they may be composed of the bones of certain fish, joined, 
bound and interwoven together, some lengthwise, some crosswise; bent and rounded 
struts are then added, eventually forming a coracle ready to float upon the water. The 
female halcyon then brings them where they can be lapped around by the waves of the 
sea. The salt water gently beats upon them, showing her where ill-fitting joints need 
daubing and where she needs to strengthen the sections where her construction is 
coming loose or pulling apart at the beating of the sea. On the other hand this battering 
by the waves binds all the good joints up tight and knits them so close that they can only 
with difficulty be smashed, broken or even damaged by blows with stone or iron. Most 
wonderful of all are the shape and proportions of the concave hold, for it is shaped and 
proportioned to admit only one creature snugly: the one who made it. To everything else 
it is closed, barred and impenetrable. Nothing can get in, not even sea water. 

That is a fine description of this construction, taken from a fine book. Yet even that, 
it seems to me, fails to enlighten us adequately about the difficulty of such architecture. 
What silly vanity leads us to take products we can neither imitate nor understand, range 
them beneath us and treat them with disdain.- 

Let us go further into such equalities and correspondences between us and the 
beasts. The human soul takes pride in its privilege of bringing all its conceptions into 
harmony with its own condition: everything it conceives is stripped of its mortal and 
physical qualities; it compels everything which it judges worthy of notice to divest itself 
completely of such of its own conditions as are corruptible - of all physical accidents 
such as depth, length, breadth, weight, colour, smell, roughness, smoothness, hardness, 
softness; it casts them aside like old garments; it clothes everything in its own condition, 
spiritual and immortal: the Rome or the Paris which exists in my soul - the Paris 
imagined in thought - is conceived in my imagination without size, without place, 


506 


without stone, without plaster, without wood. Well, that self-same privilege seems 
evidently shared with the beasts; for, asleep on its litter, a war-horse accustomed to 
trumpet, harquebus and combat can be seen twitching and trembling as though in the 
thick of battle: clearly its mind is conceiving a drum without drum-beats, an army 
without arms, without physical body. 


Quippe videbis equos fortes, cum membra jacebunt 
In somnis, sudare tamen, spirareque saepe, 

Et quasi de palma summas contendere vires. 


[You can, indeed, see vigorous racehorses, resting their limbs in sleep, yet often 
sweating and panting as though disputing the prize with all their might.] 

The greyhound imagines a hare in a dream: we can see it panting after it in its sleep 
as it stretches out its tail, twitches its thighs and exactly imitates its movements in the 
chase: that hare has no coat and no bones. 


Venantumque canes in molli saepe quiete 
Jactant crura tamen subito, vocesque repente 
Mittunt, et crebras reducunt naribus auras, 

Ut vestigia si teneant inventa ferarum. 
Expergefactique sequuntur inania saepe 
Cervorum simulachra, fugae quasi dedita cernant: 
Donee discussis redeant erroribus ad se. 


[Often hunting dogs lying quietly asleep, suddenly paw about, bark out loud and 
sharply draw their breath as if they were on the track of their prey. Even after they have 
started out of their sleep they still pursue that empty ghost of a stag as though they could 
see it fleeing before them, until the error fades and they come back to themselves.] 

Guard dogs can be found growling in their sleep, then yapping and finally waking 
with a start as though they saw some stranger coming: that stranger which their souls 
can see is a spiritual man, not perceptible to the senses, without dimensions, without 
colour and without being. 


consueta domi catulorum blanda propago 
Degere, saepe levem ex oculis volucremque soporem 
Discutere, et corpus de terra corripere instant, 
Proinde quasi ignotas facies atque ora tueantur. 


[The dog, that fawning creature at home in our houses, often quivers its eyelids in 


507 



winged sleep and starts to its feet as if it saw the faces and features of strangers. ]— 

As for physical beauty, before I can go any further I need to know if we can agree 
over its description. It seems we have little knowledge of natural beauty or of beauty in 
general, since we humans give so many diverse forms to our own beauty; [C] if it had 
been prescribed by Nature, we would all hold common views about it, just as we all 
agree that fire is hot. We give human beauty any form we fancy: 


[B] Turpis Romano Belgicus ore color. 


[On the face of a Roman. Belgian’s colour is ugly.]— 

[A] For a painter in the Indies beauty is black and sunburnt, with thick swollen lips 
and broad flat noses; [B] there, they load the cartilage between the nostrils with great 
rings of gold, so that it hangs right down to the lips; the lower lip is similarly weighed 
down to the chin with great hoops studded with precious jewels; for them it is elegant to 
lay their teeth bare [C] exposing the gum below their roots. [B] In Peru, big ears are 
beautiful: they stretch them as far as they can, artificially. [C] A man still alive today 
says that he saw in the East a country where this custom of stretching ears and loading 
them with jewels is held in such esteem that he was often able to thrust his arm, clothes 
and all, through the holes women pierced in their lobes. [B] Elsewhere there are whole 
nations who carefully blacken their teeth and loathe seeing white ones. Elsewhere they 
dye them red. [C] Not only in the Basque country do they prefer beautiful women to 
have shaven heads; the same applies elsewhere - even, according to Pliny, in certain icy 
lands. [B] The women of Mexico count low foreheads as a sign of beauty: so, while they 
pluck hair from the rest of their body, there they encourage it to grow thick and 
propagate it artificially. They hold large breasts in such high esteem that they affect 
giving suck to their children over their shoulders. - 

[A] We would fashion ugliness that way. 

Italians make beauty fat and heavy; Spaniards gaunt and skinny; some of us French 
make it fair, others dark; some soft and delicate; others strong and robust; some desire 
grace and delicacy; others proud bearing and majesty. [C] Similarly, while Plato 
considered the sphere to be the perfection of beauty- the Epicureans preferred the 
pyramid or the square, finding it hard to swallow a god who was shaped like a ball! 

[A] Anyway, Nature has no more given man privileges in beauty than in any other 
of her common laws. If we judge ourselves fairly we will find some animals less 


508 


favoured than we are, others (more numerous) which are more so: [C] ‘a multis 
animalibus decore vincimur’ [we are surpassed in beauty by many of the beasts]- - 
especially among our fellow-citizens, the denizens of dry land. As for the creatures of 
the sea, we can leave their beauty of form aside, since it has no point of comparison 
with ours; we are thoroughly beaten by them in colour, brightness, sheen and the general 
disposition of our members; beaten by the birds of the air, too, in all qualities. And [A] 
then there is that privilege the poets stress - the fact that we hold ourselves erect, gazing 
up to heaven, from whence we came: 


Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terrain , 
Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre 
Jussit, et erectos ad sydera tollere vultus. 


[The other animals look downwards to the ground; God gave Man a face held high 
and ordered him to look towards heaven and raise his eyes towards the sun, moon and 
stars.]— 

That privilege is well and truly poetic! Some quite small animals gaze up to heaven 
all the time; camels and ostriches seem to me to have necks straighter than ours and 
more erect. [C] And which are these animals which are supposed not to have faces in 
front and on top, not to look straight ahead as we do nor, in their normal posture, to see 
as much of heaven and earth as we do? What characteristics of man’s body as described 
by Plato and Cicero do not equally apply to a thousand other animals ! 1111 [A] The 
animals most like us are the worst and the ugliest of the bunch: the one with an outward 
appearance and face closest to ours is the baboon; 


[C] Simla quam similis, turpissima bestia, nobis! 


i 

[That vilest of beast, the monkey - how like us!]— 

[A] the one with inwards and vital organs closest to ours is the pig.— 

When a think of the human animal, stark naked, with all its blemishes, natural 
weaknesses and flaws, I find that we have more cause to cover ourselves up than any 
other animal. (That even applies to the female sex which seems to have a greater share 
of beauty.) We could be excused for having borrowed from those which Nature has 
favoured more than us, decking ourselves in their beauty,— hiding ourselves in their 
coats: wool, feathers, hide or silk. 


509 


We may note en passant that we are the only animals whose physical defects are 
offensive to our fellows; we are also the only ones to hide from others of our species 
when answering the calls of Nature. Also worth considering is the fact that those who 
know prescribe for lovesickness a good look at the totally naked body which is so much 
desired. To cool amorous passion, all you need to do is to be free to look at the one you 
love! 


Me quod obscoencis in aperto corpore partes 
Viderat, in cursu qui fuit, haesit amor. 


[It has been known for a man to see his mistress’s private parts and to find his ardour 
pulled up short.]— 

It is true that this prescription may result from a cool and delicate humour in Man; 
nevertheless it is a striking sign of our weakness that it is enough for us to frequent and 
know each other for us to feel disgust. [B] Ladies are circumspect and keep us out of 
their dressing-rooms before they have put on their paint and decked themselves out for 
public show: that is not so much modesty as skill and foresight. 

[Al] Nee veneres nostras hoc fallit: quo magis ipsae 
Omnia summopere hos vitae post scenia celant, 

Quos retinere volunt adstrictoque esse in amore. 


[Fair women know this: they are all the more careful to hide the changing-rooms of 
their lives from those lovers they wish to hold and bind to them.]— 

Yet we like all the parts of some animals, finding them so pleasing to our tastes that 
from their very droppings, discharges and excreta we make dainty things to eat as well 
as ornaments and perfumes. 

Such arguments apply only to the common order of men; they are not sacrilegious 
enough to want to include those beauties, supernatural and beyond the common order, 
which can sometimes be seen shining among us like stars beneath a bodily and earthly 
veil. 

Now even that share in Nature’s favour which we do concede to the animals is much 
to their advantage. To ourselves we attribute goods which are purely imaginary and 
fantastical; future, absent goods, which it exceeds our human capacity, of itself, to 
vouch for; or else they are goods which our unruly opinions attribute to ourselves quite 
wrongly, such as knowledge, rationality or pre-eminence. We abandon to animals a 
share in solid, palpable goods which really do exist: peace, repose, security, innocence, 


510 


health... Health! the fairest and finest gift that Nature can bestow. That is why even 
Stoic Philosophy dares to assert that Heraclitus (who had dropsy) and Pherecydes (who 
had been infected by lice) would have been right, if they could, to barter their wisdom 
against a cure. By weighing and comparing wisdom against health they make it even 
more splendid than in another of their assertions. Supposing Circe (they say) had 
presented Ulysses with two different potions, one to make a madman wise, the other a 
wise man mad: rather than allow her to transform him from human to beast, he ought to 
have accepted the one that would make him mad. Wisdom herself, they say, would have 
argued like this: ‘Leave me, forsake me, rather than lodge me in the bodily shape of an 
ass.’ What? Will philosophers forsake Wisdom, great and divine, to cleave to the veil of 
this earthy body?— So we do not, after all, excel over beasts by wit and our power of 
reason but merely by our physical beauty, our beautiful colour, the beautiful way our 
members are arranged! For things like that we must forsake our intellect, our moral 
wisdom and what not! 

Well, that is a frank and artless admission and I accept it. At least philosophers have 
admitted that all those qualities they make such a fuss about are fantastic and vain: even 
if beasts had all the virtue, knowledge, wisdom and contentment of the Stoic [C] they 
would still be beasts, [A] in no way to be compared to any man, however wretched, 
wicked or daft! [C] In fine, nothing is worth anything if it does not look like us. Even 
God has to become like us, to be appreciated - I shall go into that later.— It is clear 
from this that [A] we do not place ourselves above other animals and reject their 
condition and companionship by right reason but out of stubbornness and insane 
arrogance. 

To get back to the subject: we have been allotted inconstancy, hesitation, doubt, 
pain, superstition, worries about what will happen (even after we are dead), ambition, 
greed, jealousy, envy, unruly, insane and untameable appetites, war, lies, disloyalty, 
backbiting and curiosity. We take pride in our fair, discursive reason and our capacity to 
judge and to know, but we have bought them at a price which is strangely excessive if it 
includes those passions without number which prey upon us. [B] Unless, that is, we 
choose, like Socrates, to pride ourselves on the one noteworthy prerogative we do have 
over the beasts: Nature lays down limits and seasons to their lusts, but gives us a full rein 
- anytime, any place. 

[C] Ut vinum aegrotis, quia prodest raro, nocet saepissime, melius est non adhibere 
omnino, quam, spe dubiae salutis, in apertam perniciem incurrere: sic baud scio an 
melius fuerit humano generi motum istum celerem cogitationis, acumen, solertiam, quam 
rationem vocamus, quoniam pestifera sint multis, admodum paucis salutaria, non dari 


511 


omnino, quam tam munifice et tarn large dari. 

[Wine is often bad and rarely good for the sick, so it is better to let them have none at 
all than to run known risks for a doubtful remedy. So too with that mental agility, 
shrewdness and ingenuity which we call reason : it is baleful to many and good for only a 
few. It would have been better for Man not to have been given it at all than to have been 
given it with such great munificence.]— 

[A] What good did their great erudition do for Varro and Aristotle? Did it free them 
from human ills? Did it relieve them of misfortunes such as befall a common porter? 
Could logic console them for the gout - and did they feel it any the less because they 
knew how that humour lodged in their joints? Did it help them to come to terms with 
death, knowing that whole tribes take delight in it? Did they not mind being cuckolded, 
since they knew that in some place or other men have wives in common? Not at all. 
Varro among the Romans and Aristotle among the Greeks were ranked first for 
knowledge at a time when learning was flourishing and at its best. Yet nobody says that 
their lives were particularly outstanding. There are, in fact, notorious stains on the life of 
the Greek one, which he cannot easily escape.— [B] Have we discovered that health and 
pleasure taste better if you know astrology or grammar - 


Illiterati num minus nervi rigent? 


[Men who cannot read do not find it harder to get an erection, do they?] 


- or that shame and poverty become more bearable? 


Scilicet et morbis et debilitate carebis, 

Et luctum et curam effugies, et tempora vitae 
Longa tibi post haecfato meliore dabuntur. 


[You will doubtless be free from ills and weakness and be free from grief and care, 
and a long life will be granted you, one with a better destiny.] 

I have seen in my time hundreds of craftsmen and ploughmen wiser and happier than 
University Rectors - and whom I would rather be like. Among the necessities of life 
learning seems to me to rank with fame, noble blood and dignity- [C] or, at most, with 
beauty, riches [A] and such other qualities which do indeed contribute a great deal to 
life, but from a distance and somewhat more in the mind than in nature. 


512 


[C] We hardly need more duties, laws and rules of conduct in human society than 
cranes or ants do in theirs: they have no learning, yet live their lives quite ordinately. If 
Man were wise he would gauge the true worth of anything by its usefulness and 
appropriateness to his life. 

[A] If anyone were to tot up our deeds and our actions he would find more 
outstanding men among the ignorant than among the wise - outstanding in virtues of 
every kind. Old Rome seems to me to have borne many men of greater worth, both in 
peace and war, than the later, cultured Rome which brought about its own downfall. 
Even if everything else were identical, at very least valour and uprightness would still tilt 
the balance towards Old Rome, for they make uniquely good bedfellows with simplicity. 

But I will let this subject drop; it would draw me further on than I want to go. I will 
merely add this: only humility and submissiveness— can produce a good man man. We 
must not let everyone work out for himself what his duties are. Duty must be laid down 
for him, not chosen by him from his own reasoning; otherwise, out of the weakness and 
infinite variety of our reasons and opinions, we will - as Epicurus said - end up forging 
duties for ourselves which will have us eating each other. The first commandment which 
God ever gave to Man was the law of pure obedience. It was a bare and simple order, 
leaving Man no room for knowing or arguing [C] - since the principal duty of a 
reasonable soul which acknowledges. Superior and. Benefactor in heaven is to obey him. 
All other virtues are bom of submission and obedience, just as all other sins are born of 
pride. [B] The first temptation came to humankind from the opposite extreme: the 
Devil first poured his poison into our ears with promises about knowledge and 
understanding: Eritis sicut dii, scientes bonum et malum’ [Ye shall be as Gods, knowing 
good and evil]. [C] In Homer, when the Sirens wished to deceive Ulysses, draw him into 
their dangerous snares and so destroy him, they offered him the gift of knowledge.— 

[A] There is a plague on Man: his opinion that he knows something. That is why 
ignorance is so strongly advocated by our religion as a quality appropriate to belief and 
obedience. [C] ‘Cavete ne quis vos decipiat per philosophiam et inanes seductiones 
secundum elementa mundi ’ [Beware lest any man cheat you through philosophy and vain 
deceptions, according to the rudiments of the world].— 

[A] All the philosophers of all the sects are in general accord over one thing: that 
the sovereign good consists in peace of mind and body. [B] But where are we to find it? 


[A] Ad summum sapiens lino minor est Jove: dives, 
Liber, honoratus, pulcher, rex denique regum: 
Praecipue sanus, nisi cum pituita molesta est. 


513 


[To sum up then: the wise man has only one superior - Jupiter - and is rich, free, 
honourable, beautiful, the king of kings in fact... especially when well and not troubled 
by snot!] 

It does seem true that Nature allotted us one thing only to console us for our pitiful, 
wretched condition: arrogance. Epictetus agrees, saying that Man has nothing properly 
his own except his opinions. For our portion we have been allotted wind and smoke.— 

[B] Philosophy asserts that gods enjoy health as it really is, though they can 
understand illness; Man, on the contrary, enjoys his goods only in fantasy, but knows ills 
as they really are.- [A] We have done right to emphasize our imaginative powers: all 
our goods exist only in a dream. 

Man is a wretched creature, subject to calamities;— but just listen to him bragging: 
‘There is no occupation’, says Cicero, ‘so sweet as scholarship; scholarship is the means 
of making known to us, while still in this world, the infinity of matter, the immense 
grandeur of Nature, the heavens, the lands and the seas. Scholarship has taught us piety, 
moderation, greatness of heart; it snatches our souls from darkness and shows them all 
things, the high and the low, the first, the last and everything between; scholarship 
furnishes us with the means of living well and happily; it teaches us how to spend our 
lives without discontent and without vexation’...— Is this fellow describing the 
properties of almighty and everlasting God! In practice, thousands of little women in 
their villages have lived lives more gentle, more equable, more constant than his. 


[AI] Deus ille fuit, Deus, inclute Memmi, 
Qui princeps vitae rationem invenit earn, quae 
Nunc appellatur sapientia , quique per artem 
Fluctibus e tantis vitam tantisque tenebris 
In tarn tranquillo et tarn clara luce locavit. 


[It was a god, noble Memmius, yes, a god who first discovered that rule of life which 
we now call Wisdom and who, through his skill, brought our lives out from storm and 
darkness and fixed them in such tranquillity and light.] 

Beautiful, magnificent words, those! Yet, despite the god who taught him such divine 
wisdom, a minor accident reduced the wits of the fellow who wrote them to a state 
worse than that of the meanest shepherd!— 

[A] Of similar impudence are [C] that promise of Democritus in his preface: ‘I am 
going to write about Everything’; the stupid title Aristotle bestows on us men: ‘Mortal 
Gods’;— and [A] Chrysippus’ judgement that Dion was as virtuous as God. And even 
Seneca, my favourite, asserts that, by God’s gift he is living: but living well he owes to 


514 


himself [C] - which conforms to what that other fellow said: ‘In virtute vere gloriamur; 
quod non contingeret, si id donum a deo, non a nobis haberemus’ [We rightly glory in our 
virtue; that would not arise if it were a gift of God and not of ourselves]. This is in 
Seneca, too: ‘The wise man has fortitude similar to God’s, but since he has it within 
human weakness, he surpasses God.’— 

[A] There is nothing more common than rash quips like these. We are so much 
more jealous of our own interests than of those of our Creator that not one of us is 
more shocked when he sees himself made equal to God than reduced to the ranks of the 
other animals. We must trample down this stupid vanity, violently and boldly shaking 
the absurd foundations on which we base such false opinions. So long as Man thinks he 
has means and powers deriving from himself he will never acknowledge what he owes to 
his Master. All his geese will be swans, as the saying goes. So we must strip him down 
to his shirt-tails. Let us look at some notable examples of what his philosophy actually 
produces. 

Possidonius was beset with an illness so painful that it made him twist his arms and 
grind his teeth; he thought he could cock a snook at Pain by crying out at her: ‘It’s no 
good; whatever you do I will never admit that you are evil.’ He boasts that he will at 
least contain his speech within the rules of his sect, yet he feels exactly the same pain as 
my footman.— [C] ‘Re succumbere non oportebat verbis gloriantem’ [If you boast in 
words you should not surrender in fact]. 

Arcesilaus was suffering from gout. Carneades came to see him and was just going 
sadly away when he called him back; he pointed from his feet to his heart and said, 
‘Nothing has passed from here to there.’ There is a little more elegance in that: he 
admits to pain and would gladly be rid of it; it is an evil, all right, but his heart is neither 
cast down nor weakened by it. That other fellow clings to his position, which is, I fear, 
more a matter of words than of reality. When Dionysius of Heraclea was nearly driven 
out of his mind by stabbing pains in his eyes, he was forced to give up such Stoical 
assertions.— 

[A] But supposing knowledge actually could produce the effects claimed for it, 
actually could blunt and reduce the pangs of the misfortunes which beset us: even then, 
what does it really achieve over and beyond what ignorance does - more purely and 
more evidently? When Pyrrho, the philosopher, was exposed to the hazards of a mighty 
tempest, he could set no better example before his companions than the indifference of 
a pig on board ship with them: it gazed at the storm quite free from fear. When 
Philosophy has run out of precepts she sends us back to athletes and mule-drivers. Such 
men are usually less apprehensive of death, pain and other misfortunes. They also show 


515 


more steadfastness than scholarship affords to any man not already predisposed to it by 
birth and by a duly cultivated natural talent.— What is it if not ignorance which allows 
our surgeons to make incisions in the tender limbs of children more easily than in our 
own? [C] (The same applies to horses.) [A] How many men have been made ill by the 
sheer force of imagination? Is it not normal to see men bled, purged and swallowing 
medicines to cure ills which they feel only in their minds? When we run out of genuine 
ills, Learning will lend us some of her own: this or that colour are symptoms of a 
catarrh you will have; this heat-wave threatens you with some turbulent fever; this break 
in the line of life on your left hand warns you of some grave and imminent illness... 
Finally Learning openly makes assaults against health itself: that youthful vigour and 
liveliness of yours cannot remain stable for long! Better bleed away some of their force 
in case it turns against you... 

Compare the life of a man, or enslaved by such fantasies with the life of a 
ploughman who, free from learning and prognostics, merely follows his natural appetites 
and judges things as they feel at present. He only feels ill when he really is ill; the other 
fellow often has stone in the mind before stone in the kidney. As though it were not time 
enough to suffer pain when it really comes along, our thoughts must run ahead and meet 
it. 

What I say about medicine applies to erudition in general - hence that ancient 
philosophical opinion that sovereign good lies in recognizing the weakness of our 
powers of judgement. My ignorance can supply as good a cause to hope as to fear; for 
me, the only rule of health lies in the example of other people and how I see them fare 
in similar circumstances; but since I can find all sorts of examples, I dwell on the 
comparisons which are most favourable to me! Health, full, free and entire, I welcome 
with open arms. I whet my appetites so that I can truly enjoy it, all the more so since 
health is not usual to me any more, but quite rare. Far be it from me to trouble the sweet 
repose of health with bitterness arising from a new regime based on restraint. The very 
beasts can show us that illness can be brought on by mental agitations. 

[C] The natives of Brazil are said to die only of old age; they attribute that to the 
serenity and tranquillity of the air: I would attribute it to the serenity and tranquillity of 
their souls; they are not burdened with intense emotions and unpleasant tasks and 
thoughts: they pass their lives in striking simplicity and ignorance. They have no 
literature, no laws, no kings and no religion of any kind.— 

[A] Experience shows that gross, uncouth men make more desirable and vigorous 
sexual partners; lying with a mule-driver is often more welcome than lying with a 
gentleman. How can we explain that except by assuming that emotions within the 


516 


gentleman’s soul undermine the strength of his body, break it down and exhaust it, [Al] 
just as they exhaust and harm the soul itself? Is it not true that the soul can be most 
readily thrown into mania and driven mad by its own quickness, sharpness and 
nimbleness - in short by the qualities which constitute its strength? [B] Does not the 
most subtle wisdom produce the most subtle madness? As great enmities are bom of 
great friendships and fatal illnesses are bom of radiant health, so too the most exquisite 
and delirious of manias are produced by the choicest and the most lively of the emotions 
which disturb the soul. It needs only a half turn of the peg to pass from one to the other. 
[Al] When men are demented their very actions show how appropriate madness is to 
the workings of our souls at their most vigorous. Is there anyone who does not know 
how imperceptible are the divisions separating madness from the spiritual alacrity of a 
soul set free or from actions arising from supreme and extraordinary virtue? Plato says 
that melancholics are the most teachable and the most sublime; yet none has a greater 
propensity towards madness. Spirits without number are undermined by their own force 
and subtlety. There is an Italian poet, fashioned in the atmosphere of the pure poetry of 
Antiquity, who showed more judgement and genius than any other Italian for many a 
long year; yet his agile and lively mind has overthrown him; the light has made him 
blind; his reason’s grasp was so precise and so intense that it has left him quite irrational; 
his quest for knowledge, eager and exacting, has led to his becoming like a dumb beast; 
his rare aptitude for the activities of the soul has left him with no activity... and with no 
soul. Ought he to be grateful to so murderous a mental agility? It was not so much 
compassion that I felt as anger when I saw him in so wretched a state, surviving himself, 
neglecting himself (and his works, which were published, unlicked and uncorrected; he 
had sight of this but no understanding).— 

Do you want a man who is sane, moderate, firmly based and reliable? Then array 
him in darkness, sluggishness and heaviness. [C] To teach us to be wise, make us stupid 
like beasts; to guide us you must blind us. 

[A] If you say that the convenience of having our senses chilled and blunted when 
tasting evil pains must entail the consequential inconvenience of rendering us less keenly 
appreciative of the joys of good pleasures, I agree. But the wretchedness of our human 
condition means we have less to relish than to banish: the most extreme pleasures touch 
us less than the lightest of pains: [C] ‘Segnius homines bona quam mala sentiunt’ [Men 
feel pleasure more dully than pain]. [A] We are far less aware of perfect health than of 
the slightest illness: 


pungit 

In cute vix summa violatum plagula corpus, 


517 


Quando valere nihil quemquam movet. Hoc juvat union, 
Quod me non torquet latus aut pes: caetera quisquam 
Vix queat aut sanum sese, aut sentire valentem. 


[A man feels the slightest prick which scarcely breaks his skin; yet he remains 
unmoved by excellent health. Personally I feel delight in simply being free from pain in 
foot or side, while another scarcely realizes he is well and remains unaware of his good 
health.] 

For us, being well means not being ill. So that philosophical school which sets the 
highest value on pleasure reduces it to the mere absence of pain. To be free from ill is 
the greatest good that Man can hope for. [C] As Ennius puts it, 


Nimium boni est, cui nihil est mali 


[Ample good consists in being free from ill]. 

[A] For even that tickling excitement which accompanies certain pleasures and 
which seems to exalt us above mere good health and freedom from pain, that shifting 
delight, active, inexplicably biting and sharp, aims in the end at freedom from pain. The 
appetite which enraptures us when we lie with women merely aims at banishing the pain 
brought on by the frenzy of our inflamed desires; all it seeks is rest and repose, free 
from the fever of passion. 

The same applies to all other appetites. I maintain, therefore, that if ignorant 
simplicity can bring us to an absence of pain, then it brings us to a state which, given the 
human condition, is very blessedness. 

[C] Yet we should not think of a simplicity so leaden as to be unable to taste 
anything. Crantor was right to attack ‘freedom from pain’ as conceived by Epicurus, 
insofar as it was built upon foundations so deep that pain could not even draw near to it 
or arise within it. I have no words of praise for a ‘freedom from pain’ which is neither 
possible nor desirable. I am pleased enough not to be ill but, if I am ill, I want to know; 
if you cut me open or cauterize me, I want to feel it. Truly, anyone who could uproot all 
knowledge of pain would equally eradicate all knowledge of pleasure and finally destroy 
Man: ‘Istud nihil dolere, non sine magna mercede contingit immanitatis in animo, stuporis 
in corpore’ [That ‘freedom from pain’ has a high price: cruelty in the soul, insensate 
dullness in the body]. For Man, ill can be good at times; it is not always right to flee 
pain, not always right to chase after pleasure. 


518 


[A] It greatly advances the honour of Ignorance that Learning has to throw us into 
her arms when powerless to stiffen our backs against the weight of our ills; she has to 
make terms, slipping the reins and giving us leave to seek refuge in the lap of Ignorance, 
finding under her protection a shelter from the blows and outrages of Fortune. 

Learning instructs us to [C] withdraw our thoughts from the ills which beset us now 
and to occupy them by recalling the good times we have known; [A] to make use of the 
memory of past joys in order to console ourselves for present sorrows, or to call in the 
help of vanished happiness to set against the things which oppress us now - [C] 
‘Levationes aegritudinum in avocatione a cogitanda molestia et revocatione ad 
contemplandas voluptates ponit’ [He found a way to lessen sorrows by summoning 
thoughts away from troubles and calling them back to gaze on pleasure] - [A] when 
Learning runs out of force, she turns to cunning; when strength of arm and body fails, 
she resorts to conjuring tricks and nimble footwork; if that is not what is meant, what 
does it mean? When any reasonable man, let alone a philosopher, feels in reality a 
blazing thirst brought on by a burning fever, can you buy him off with memories of the 
delights of Greek wine? [B] That would only make a bad bargain worse. 


Che ricorclarsi il ben doppia la noia. 


[Recalling pleasure doubles pain.] 


[A] Of a similar nature is that other counsel which Philosophy gives us: to keep only 
past pleasures in mind and to wipe off the sorrows we have known - as if we had the art 
of forgetfulness in our power. [C] Anyway, such advice makes us worse: 


Suavis est laborum praeteritorum memoria. 


[Sweet is the memory of toils now past.] 


[A] Philosophy ought to arm me with weapons to fight against Fortune; she should 
stiffen my resolve to trample human adversities underfoot; how has she grown so weak 
as to have me bolting into burrows with such cowardly and stupid evasions? Memory 
reproduces what she wants, not what we choose. Indeed there is nothing which stamps 
anything so vividly on our memory as the desire not to remember it: the best way to 
impress anything on our souls and to make them stand guard over it, is to beg them to 


519 



forget it. 

- [C] The following is false: Est situm in nobis, ut et adversa quasi perpetua 
oblivione obruamus, et secunda jucunde et suaviter meminerimus’ [There is within us a 
capacity for consigning misfortunes to total oblivion, while remembering favourable 
things with joy and delight]. 

The following is true: ‘Memini etiam quae nolo, oblivisci non possum quae volo' [1 
remember things I do not want to remember and I cannot forget things I want to 
forget].— - 

[A] Whose advice have I just cited? Why, that of the man [C] ‘qui se unus sapientem 
profiteri sit ausus’ [who, alone, dared to say he was wise]; 


[A] Qui genus humanum ingenio superavit, et omnes 
Praestrinxit Stellas, exortus uti aetherius sol. 


[who soared above human kind by his genius and who, like the Sun rising in heaven, 
obscured all the stars.] 

Emptying and stripping memory is, surely, the true and proper road to ignorance. 
[C] ‘Iners malorum remedium ignorantia est’ [Ignorance is an artless remedy for our 
ills] A 0 

[A] We find several similar precepts permitting us, when strong and lively Reason 
cannot suffice, to borrow the trivial pretences of the vulgar, provided that they make us 
happy or provide consolation. Those who cannot cure a wound are pleased with 
palliatives which deaden it. If philosophers could only find a way of adding order and 
constancy to a life which was maintained in joy and tranquillity by weakness and 
sickness of judgement, they would be prepared to accept it. I do not think they will deny 
me that. 


Pot are et spargere flores 
Incipiam, patiarque vel inconsultus haberi! 


[I may appear silly, but I am going to start drinking and strewing flowers about!]— 

You would find several philosophers agreeing with Lycas: he was a man of very 
orderly habits, living quietly and peaceably at home; he failed in none of the duties he 
owed to family and strangers; he guarded himself effectively from harm; however, some 
defect in his senses led him to imprint a mad fantasy on his brain: he always thought he 
was in the theatre watching games, plays and the finest comedies in the world. Being 


520 


cured of this corrupt humour, he nearly took his doctors to court to make them restore 
those sweet fantasies— to him: 


poll me occidistis, amici, 

Non servastis, ait, cui sic extorta voluptas, 
Et demptus per vim mentis gratissimus error. 


[‘You have killed me, my friends, not cured me,’ he said. ‘You have wrenched my 
pleasure from me and taken away by force that most delightful wandering of my mind.’] 

Thrasilaus, son of Pythodorus, had a similar mad fantasy; he came to believe that all 
the ships sailing out of the port of Piraeus or coming in to dock there were working for 
him alone. When good fortune attended their voyages he rejoiced in it and welcomed 
them with delight. His brother Crito brought him to his senses, but he sorely missed his 
former condition, which had been full of happiness, not burdened by troubles. 

A line of Ancient Greek poetry says ‘There is great convenience in not being too 
wise’: ’^ v T 0 (ppovetv yhp prjSev lijdiaxoc, fitoq. $ 0 cl oes Ecclesiastes: ‘In much 

wisdom there is much sadness, and he that acquireth knowledge acquireth worry and 
travail.’ 

Philosophy in general agrees— that there is an ultimate remedy to be prescribed for 
every kind of trouble: namely, ending our life if we find it intolerable. [C] ‘Placet? Pare. 
Non placet? Quacunque vis, exi. ’ [All right? Then put up with it. Not all right? Then out 
you go, any way you like.] - ‘Pungit dolor? Vel fodiat sane. Si nudus es, da jugulum; sin 
tectus armis Vulcaniis, id est fortitudine, resiste. ’ [Does it hurt? Is it excruciating? If you 
are defenceless, get your throat cut; if you are armed with the arms of Vulcan (that is, 
fortitude) then fight it!] As the Greeks said at their banquets: ‘Let him drink or be off!’ 
(‘Aut bibat, aut abeat! T ) - That is particularly apt if you pronounce Cicero’s language 
like. Gascon, changing your ‘B’s to ‘V’s: Aut vivat- ‘Let him live...’ 


[A] Vivere si recte nescis, decede peritis; 
Lusisti satis, edisti satis atque bibisti; 

Tempus abire tibi est, ne potum largius aequo 
Rideat et pulset lasciva decentius aetas. 


[If you do not know how to live as you should, give way to those who do. You have 
played enough in bed; you have eaten enough, drunk enough: it is time to be off, lest 
you start to drink too much and find that pretty girls rightly laugh at you and push you 
away.] 


521 


But what does this consensus amount to, if not to a confession of powerlessness on 
the part of Philosophy? She sends us for protection not merely to ignorance but to 
insensibility, to a total lack of sensation, to non-being. 


Democritum postquam matura vetustas 
Admonuit memorem motus languescere mentis, 
Sponte sua leto caput obvius obtulit ipse. 


[When mature old age warned Democritus that he was losing his memory and his 
mental faculties, he spontaneously offered his head to Destiny.] 

As Antisthenes said: We need a store of intelligence, to understand; failing that, a 
hangman’s rope. In this connection Chrysippus used to quote from Tyrtaeus the poet: 
‘Draw near to virtue... or to death. ’ [C] Crates used to say that love was cured by time or 
hunger; those who like neither can use the rope. [B] Sextius - the one whom Seneca and 
Plutarch talk so highly of - gave up everything and threw himself into the study of 
philosophy; he found his progress too long and too slow, so he decided to drown himself 
in the sea. In default of learning, he ran to death. 

Philosophy lays down the law on this subject in these words: If some great evil 
should chance upon you - one you cannot remedy - then a haven is always near: swim 
out of your body as from a leaky boat; only a fool is bound to his body, not by love of 
life but by fear of death.— 

[A] Just as life is made more pleasant by simplicity, it is also made better and more 
innocent (as I was about to say earlier on). According to St Paul, it is the simple and the 
ignorant who rise up and take hold of heaven, whereas we, with all our learning, plunge 
down into the bottomless pit of hell.— I will not linger here over two Roman Emperors, 
Valentian - a sworn enemy of knowledge and scholarship - and Licinius, who called 
them a poison and a plague within the body politic;— nor over Mahomet who, [C] I am 
told, [A] forbade his followers to study. What we must do is to attach great weight to the 
authoritative example of a great man, Lycurgus, as well as to the respect we owe to 
Sparta, a venerable, great and awe-inspiring form of government, where letters were not 
taught or practised but where virtue and happiness long flourished. Those who come 
back from the New World discovered by the Spaniards in the time of our fathers can 
testify how those peoples, without magistrates or laws, live lives more Ordinate and 
more just than any we find in our own countries, where there are more laws and legal 
officials than there are deeds or inhabitants. 


Di cittatorie piene e di libelli. 


522 


D’esamine e di carte, diprocure, 
Hanno le mani e il seno, e gran fastelli 
Di cliiose, di consigli e di letture: 

Per cui le faculta de poverelli 
Non sono mai ne le citta sicure; 

Hanno dietro e dinanzi, e d'ambi ilati, 
Notai procuratori e advocati. 


[Their hands and their law-bags are full of summonses, libels, inquests, documents 
and powers-of-attomey; they have great folders full of glosses, counsels’ opinions and 
statements. For all that, the poor are never safe in their cities but are surrounded, in 
front, behind and on both sides, by procurators and lawyers.]— 

A later Roman senator meant much the same when he said that the breath of their 
forebears stank of garlic but inwardly they smelt of the musk of a good conscience; men 
of his time, on the contrary, were doused in perfume yet inwardly stank of every sort of 
vice.— In other words he agrees with me: they had ample learning and ability but were 
very short of integrity. Lack of refinement, ignorance, simplicity and roughness go 
easily with innocence, whereas curiosity, subtlety and knowledge have falsehood in their 
train; the main qualities which conserve human society are humility, fear and goodness: 
they require a soul which is empty, teachable and not thinking much of itself.— 

In Man curiosity is an innate evil, dating from his origins: Christians know that 
particularly well. The original Fall occurred when Man was anxious to increase his 
wisdom and knowledge: that path led headlong to eternal damnation. Pride undoes man; 
it corrupts him; pride makes him leave the trodden paths, welcome novelty and prefer to 
be the leader of a lost band wandering along the road to perdition; prefer to be a master 
of error and lies than a pupil in the school of Truth, guided by others and led by the 
hand along the straight and beaten path. That is perhaps what was meant by that old 
Greek saying, that Superstition follows Pride and obeys it as a father i 1 SaatSoufiovfa Ktxxinep mxxpi xcb xvcptp netxexai. 

140 

[C] ‘Oh Pride! How thou dost trammel us!’ When Socrates was told that the god of 
Wisdom had called him wise, he was thunderstruck; he ransacked his mind and shook 
himself out but could find nothing to base this divine judgement upon. He knew other 
men who were as just, temperate, valiant and wise as he was: others he knew to be more 
eloquent, more handsome, more useful to their country. He finally concluded that, if he 
was different from others and wiser, it was only because he did not think he was; that 
his God thought any human who believed himself to be knowledgeable and wise was a 
singularly stupid animal; that his best teaching taught ignorance and his best wisdom 
was simplicity.— 


523 


[A] The Word of God proclaims that those of us who think well of ourselves are to 
be pitied: Dust and ashes (it says to them) what have ye to boast about? And elsewhere: 
God maketh man like unto a shadow who will judge him when the light departeth and 
the shadow vanisheth?— 

In truth we are but nothing. 

It is so far beyond our power to comprehend the majesty of God that the very works 
of our Creator which best carry his mark are the ones we least understand. To come 
across something unbelievable is, for Christians, an opportunity to exercise belief; it is 
all the more reasonable precisely because it runs counter to human reason. [B] If it were 
reasonable, it would not be a miracle if it followed a pattern, it would not be unique. [C] 
‘Melius scitur deus nesciendo ’ [God is best known by not knowing], said St Augustine. 
And Tacitus says, ‘Sanctius est ac reverentius de actis deorum credere quam scire’ [It is 
more holy and pious to believe what the gods have done than to understand them].— 
Plato reckons that there is an element of vicious impiety in inquiring too curiously about 
God and the world or about first causes. As for Cicero, he says: ‘Atque ilium quidem 
parentem hujus universitatis invenire difficile; et, quum jam inveneris, indicare in vulgus, 
nefas’ [It is hard to discover the Begetter of this universe; and when you do discover 
him, it is impious to disclose him to the populace].— 

[A] We confidently use words like might, truth, justice. They are words signifying 
something great. But what that ‘something’ is we cannot see or conceive. [B] We say 
that God ‘fears’, that God ‘is angry’, that God ‘loves’: 


Immortalia mortali sermone notantes. 


[Denoting immortal things in mortal speech.]— 

But they are disturbances and emotions which in any form known to us find no place 
in God. Nor can we imagine them in forms known to him. [A] God alone can know 
himself; God alone can interpret his works. [C] And he uses improper, human, words to 
do so, stooping down to the earth where we lie sprawling. 

Take Prudence; that consists in a choice between good and evil; how can that apply 
to God? No evil can touch him. Or take Reason and Intelligence, by which we seek to 
attain clarity amidst obscurity; there is nothing obscure to God. Or Justice, which 
distributes to each his due and which was begotten for the good of society and 
communities of men; how can that exist in God? And what about Temperance? It 


524 


moderates bodily pleasures which have no place in the Godhead. Nor is Fortitude in the 
face of pain, toil or danger one of God’s qualities: those three things are unknown to 
him. That explains why Aristotle held that God is equally as free from virtue as from 
vice. ‘Neque gratia neque ira teneri potest, quod quae talia essent, imbecilla essent omnia' 
[He can experience neither gratitude nor anger; such things are found only in the 
weak].— 

[A] Whatever share in the knowledge of Truth we may have obtained, it has not 
been acquired by our own powers. God has clearly shown us that: it was out of the 
common people that he chose simple and ignorant apostles to bear witness of his 
wondrous secrets; the Christian faith is not something obtained by us: it is, purely and 
simply, a gift depending on the generosity of Another. Our religion did not come to us 
through reasoned arguments or from our own intelligence: it came to us from outside 
authority, by commandments. That being so, weakness of judgement helps us more than 
strength; blindness, more than clarity of vision. We become learned in God’s wisdom 
more by ignorance than by knowledge. It is not surprising that our earth-based, natural 
means cannot conceive knowledge which is heaven-based and supernatural; let us 
merely bring our submissiveness and obedience: ‘For it is written: I will destroy the 
wisdom of the wise and bring to nothing the prudence of the prudent. Where is the 
wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the disputer of this world? Hath God not made the 
wisdom of this world like unto the foolishness as of beasts? For seeing that the world, 
through wisdom, knew not God, it pleased God through the vanity of preaching to save 
them that believe.’— 

But is it within the capacity of Man to find what he is looking for? Has that quest 
for truth which has kept Man busy for so many centuries actually enriched him with 
some new power or solid truth? Now, at last, it is time to look into that question. 

I think Man will confess, if he speaks honestly, that all he has gained from so long a 
chase is knowledge of his own weakness.— By long study we have confirmed and 
verified that ignorance does lie naturally within us. The truly wise are like ears of corn: 
they shoot up and up holding their heads proudly erect - so long as they are empty; but 
when, in their maturity, they are full of swelling grain, their foreheads droop down and 
they show humility. So, too, with men who have assayed everything, sounded 
everything; within those piles of knowledge and the profusion of so many diverse things, 
they have found nothing solid, nothing firm, only vanity. They then renounce arrogance 
and recognize their natural condition.— 

[C] For that is what Velleius reproached Cotta and Cicero with: they had learned 
from Philo that they had learned nothing.— 


525 


When one of the Seven Sages of Greece, Pherecides, lay dying, he wrote to Thales 
saying, ‘I have commanded my family, once they have buried me, to send you all my 
papers; if you and the other Sages are satisfied with them, publish them; if not, suppress 
them: they contain no certainties which satisfy me. I make no claim to know what truth 
is nor to have attained truth. Rather than lay subjects bare, I lay them open. — 

[A] The wisest man that ever was, when asked what he knew, replied that the one 
thing he did know was that he knew nothing.— They say that the largest bit of what we 
do know is smaller than the tiniest bit of what we do not know; he showed that to be 
true. In other words, the very things we think we know form part of our ignorance, and 
a small part at that. [C] We know things in a dream, says Plato; we do not know them as 
they truly are.— 

‘Omnes pene veteres nihil cognosci, nihil percipi, nihil sciri posse dixerunt; angustos 
sensus, imbecillos animos, brevia curricula vitae’ [Virtually all the Ancients say that 
nothing can be understood, nothing can be perceived, nothing can be known; our senses 
are too restricted, our minds are too weak, the course of our life is too short]. m 

[A] Cicero himself, who owed such worth as he had to his learning, was said by 
Valerius to have begun to think less of literary culture .in his old age.— [C] And even 
while he was still writing he felt bound to no sect; he followed the teachings of this 
school or that as seemed to him most probable, remaining always within that Doubt 
taught by the Academy: ‘Dicendum est, sed ita ut nihil affirmem: quaeram omnia, 
dubitans plerumque et mihi diffidens ’ [I have to write, but in such a way as to vouch for 
nothing; I shall always be seeking, mostly doubting, rarely trusting myself].— 

[A] It would be too easy a game if I limited myself to the ordinary run of men 
considered en masse ; I would be justified in doing so by Man’s curious convention that 
votes are not to be weighed but counted. But let us leave aside the ordinary people, 


Qui vigilans stertit, 

Mortua cui vita est prope jam vivo atque videnti; 


[Who snore whilst they are awake and whose lives are dead even while they live and 
keep their eyes open;]— 

they have no self-awareness; they never judge themselves and let most of their natural 
faculties stand idle. I want to take Man in his highest state. Let us consider only that tiny 
number of outstanding, handpicked men who are bom with a fine natural endowment 
peculiar to themselves and who then take care to strengthen and sharpen it by skill and 
study; by such means they raise it to the highest point [C] of wisdom [A] that it can 


526 


attain to. They mould their souls in ways which keep them open on every side to every 
tendency; they assist their souls with the help of every appropriate outside support; they 
adorn them and enrich them with every advantage which they can discover both within 
and beyond this world. The highest possible form of human nature finds its home in 
such men. These are men who have given laws and constitutions to the world; it is their 
arts and sciences which have taught the world; so, too, the example of their astounding 
moral integrity. I will take account of the testimony and experience only of men such as 
these. Let us see how far they got and what they concluded. They form a fellowship such 
that any ills and defects found in them can confidently be accepted by the world as 
inherent ones. 

Whoever sets out to find something eventually reaches the point where he can say 
that he has found it, or that it cannot be found, or that he is still looking for it. The 
whole of Philosophy can be divided into these three categories; her aim is to seek true, 
certain knowledge. 

Peripatetics, Epicureans, Stoics— and others think they have discovered it. They 
founded the accepted disciplines and expounded their knowledge as certainties. 

Clitomachus, Carneades and the Academics despaired of their quest; they conclude 
that Truth cannot be grasped by human means. Their conclusion is one of weakness, of 
human ignorance. This school has had the greatest number of adherents and some of the 
noblest.— 

As for Pyrrho and the other Sceptics or Ephectics, [C] (whose teachings many of 
the Ancients derived from Homer, the Seven Sages, Archilochus and Euripides, and 
associated with Zeno, Democritus and Xenophanes), [A] they say they are still looking 
for Truth. They hold that the philosophers who think they have found it are infinitely 
wrong. They go on to add that the second category - those who are quite sure that 
human strength is incapable of reaching truth - are overbold and vain. To determine the 
limits of our powers and to know and judge the difficulty of anything whatsoever 
constitutes great, even the highest, knowledge. They doubt whether Man is capable of it. 


Nil sciri quisquis putcit, id quoque nescit 
An scire possit quo se nil scire fatetur. 


[Any man who thinks that ‘nothing can be known’, does not know whether he can 
know even that thing by which he asserts that he knows nothing.]— 

Ignorance which is aware of itself, judges itself, condemns itself, is not complete 
ignorance: complete ignorance does not even know itself. Consequently the professed 


527 


aim of Pyrrhonians is to shake all convictions, to hold nothing as certain, to vouch for 
nothing. Of the three functions attributed to the soul (cogitation, appetite and assent) 
the Sceptics admit the first two but keep their assent in a state of ambiguity, inclining 
neither way, giving not even the slightest approbation to one side or the other. 

[C] It was by gesture that Zeno illustrated his conception of the three functions of 
the soul: a hand stretched out open meant probability; half-closed, with the fingers bent 
over, meant assent; clenched, it meant understanding; with the other hand pressing it 
tighter still, it meant knowledge.— 

[A] Now the Pyrrhonians make their faculty of judgement so unbending and upright 
that it registers everything but bestows its assent on nothing. This leads to their well- 
known ataraxia : that is a calm, stable rule of life, free from all the disturbances (caused 
by the impress of opinions, or of such knowledge of reality as we think we have) which 
give birth to fear, acquisitiveness, envy, immoderate desires, ambition, pride, 
superstition, love of novelty, rebellion, disobedience, obstinacy and the greater part of 
our bodily ills. In this way, they even free themselves from passionate sectarianism, for 
their disputes are mild affairs and they are never afraid of the other side having its say. 
When they assert that heavy things tend to fall downwards, they would be most upset if 
you believed them. They want you to contradict them in order to achieve their end: 
doubt and suspense of judgement. They only put forward propositions of their own in 
order to oppose the ones they think we believe in. Accept theirs, and they will gladly 
maintain the opposite. It is all the same to them: they take no sides. If you maintain that 
snow is black, they will argue that it is, on the contrary, white. If you say that it is 
neither, their task is to say that it is both. If you conclude that you definitely know 
nothing, they will maintain that you do know something. Yes, and if you present your 
doubt as axiomatic, they will challenge you on that too, arguing that you are not in 
doubt, or that you cannot decide for certain and prove that you are in doubt. This is 
doubt taken to its limits; it shakes its own foundations; such extremes of doubt separate 
them completely from many other theories including those which in many ways do 
indeed teach doubt and ignorance.— 

[B] If some Dogmatists call green what others call yellow, why, they ask, cannot 
they doubt both of them? Can there be any proposition capable of acceptance or 
rejection which it is not right to consider ambiguous? 

Other people are prejudiced by the customs of their country, by the education given 
them by their parents or by chance encounter: normally, before the age of discretion, 
they are taken by storm and, without judgement or choice, accept this or that opinion of 
the Stoic or Epicurean sects. There they stay, mortgaged, enslaved, caught on a hook 


528 


which they cannot get off - [C] ‘ad quamcumque disciplinam velut tempestate delati, ad 
earn tanquam ad saxum adhaerescunt’ [they cling to any old teaching, like sailors 
washed up on a rock]. [B] But why should people like these not also be allowed their 
freedom, making up their own minds without bonds and slavery? [C] ‘Hoc liberiores et 
solutiores quod integra illis est judicandipotestas’ [They are all the more independent and 
free in that they enjoy the full power of judgement].— There is some advantage, surely, 
in being detached from the reins of the Necessity which curb others. [B] Is it not better 
to remain in doubt, than to get entangled in the many errors produced by human 
fantasy? Is it not better to postpone one’s adherence indefinitely than to intervene in 
factions, both quarrelling and seditious? 

[C] ‘What ought I to choose?’ - ‘Anything you wish, so long as you choose 
something.’ A daft enough reply! Yet it seems to be the one reached by every kind of 
dogmatism which refuses us the right not to know what we do not know. 

[B] Try siding with the school enjoying majority support: but it will never be safe 
enough: to defend it you will have to attack opponents by the hundreds. Is it not better to 
keep out of the fray altogether? You allow yourself to espouse, like honour and dear 
life, Aristotle’s beliefs about the eternity of the soul; to do that you must reject and 
contradict Plato. In that case, why should others be forbidden simply to go on doubting? 

164 

[C] Panaetius was legally permitted to suspend judgement about dreams, oracles, 
prophecies and divination by entrails; yet his school, the Stoics, never doubted them. 
Why cannot a wise man dare to doubt anything and everything, if Panaetius could dare 
to doubt doctrines which were taught by his own masters and founded on the common 
consent of the school he adhered to and whose doctrines he claimed to profess? 

[B] If it is a child who makes the judgement, he does not know enough about the 
subject: if it is a learned man, then he has made up his mind already! - Pyrrhonians 
have given themselves a wonderful strategic advantage by shrugging off the burden of 
self-defence. It does not matter who attacks them, as long as somebody does. Anything 
serves their purpose: if they win, your argument is defective; if you do, theirs is. If they 
lose, they show the truth of Ignorance; if you lose, you do. If they can prove that 
nothing is known: fine. If they do not succeed in proving it, that is fine too. [C] ‘Ut 
quum in eadem re paria contrariis in partibus momenta inveniuntur, facilius ab utraque 
parte assertio sustineatur’ [So that by finding equally good cases, for and against, on the 
very same subject, it is easier to suspend one’s judgement about either side].— 

They make it their pride to be far more ready to find everything false than anything 
true and to show that things are not, rather than that they are. They prefer to proclaim 


529 


what they do not believe, rather than what they do. [A] Their typical phrases include: ‘I 
have settled nothing’; ‘It is no more this than that’; ‘Not one rather than the other’; ‘I do 
not understand’; ‘Both sides seem equally likely’; ‘It is equally right to speak for and 
against either side’. [C] To them, nothing seems true which cannot also seem false. [A] 

i / 

They have sworn loyalty to the word >T[ c./o). ‘I am in suspense’; I will not budge.— 

These sayings, and others like them, form refrains which lead to a pure, whole, 
complete suspension of their judgement, which is kept permanently in abeyance. They 
use their reason for inquiry and debate but never to make choices or decisions. If you 
can picture an endless confession of ignorance, or a power of judgement which never, 
never inclines to one side or the other, then you can conceive what Pyrrhonism is. 

I have tried to explain this notion as clearly as I can, because many find it hard to 
grasp, and its very authors present it somewhat diversely and rather obscurely. 

Where morals are concerned, they conform to the common mould. They find it 
appropriate to yield to natural inclinations, to the thrust and constraints of their 
emotions, to established laws and customs and to the traditional arts.— [C] Non enim 
nos Deus ista scire, sed tantummodo uti voluit’ [For God did not want us to know such 
things: merely to make use of them]. [A] They let their everyday activities be guided by 
such considerations, neither assenting nor adhering to anything. That is why I cannot 
square with these conceptions what is told about Pyrrho himself. They— describe him 
as emotionless and virtually senseless, adopting a wild way of life, cut off from society, 
allowing himself to be bumped into by wagons, standing on the edge of precipices and 
refusing to conform to the law. That goes well beyond his teaching. He— was not 
fashioning a log or a stone but a living, arguing, thinking man, enjoying natural 
pleasures and comforts of every sort and making full use of all his parts, bodily as well 
as spiritual - [C] in, of course, a right and proper way. [A] Those false, imaginary and 
fantastic privileges usurped by Man, by which he claims to profess, arrange and 
establish the truth, were renounced and abandoned by Pyrrho, in good faith. 

- [C] Yet there is not one single school of philosophy which is not forced to allow 
its Sage (if he wishes to live) to accept a great many things which he cannot understand, 
perceive or give his assent to. Say he boards a ship. He carries out his design, not 
knowing whether it will serve his purpose; he assumes the vessel to be seaworthy, the 
pilot to be experienced and the weather to be favourable. Such attendant details are, of 
course, merely probable: he is obliged to let himself be guided by appearances, unless 
they are expressly contradicted. He has a body. He has a soul. He feels the impulsions of 
his senses and the promptings of his spirit. He cannot find within himself any sign 
specifically suggesting that it be appropriate for him to make an act of judgement: he 


530 


realizes he must not bind his consent to anything, since something false may have every 
appearance of particular truth. Despite all this, he never fails to do his duty in this life, 
fully and fittingly. 

How many disciplines are there which actually profess to be based on conjecture 
rather than on knowledge, and which, being unable to distinguish truth from falsehood, 
merely follow what seems likely? Pyrrhonians say that truth and falsehood exist: within 
us we have means of looking for them, but not of making any lasting judgement: we 
have no touchstone. 

We would be better off if we dropped our inquiries and let ourselves be moulded by 
the natural order of the world. A soul safe from prejudice has made a wondrous advance 
towards peace of mind. People who judge their judges and keep accounts of what they 
do fail to show due submissiveness. Among people who are amenable to the legitimate 
teachings of religion and politics, there are more simple and uninquisitive minds than 
minds which keep a schoolmasterly eye on causes human and divine. - 

[A] No system discovered by Man has greater usefulness nor a greater appearance 
of truth [than Pyrrhonism] which shows us Man naked, empty, aware of his natural 
weakness, fit to accept outside help from on high: Man, stripped of all human learning 
and so all the more able to lodge the divine within him, annihilating— his intellect to 
make room for faith; [C] he is no scoffer, [A] he holds no doctrine contrary to 
established custom; he is humble, obedient, teachable, keen to leam - and as a sworn 
enemy of heresy he is freed from the vain and irreligious opinions introduced by 
erroneous sects. [B] He is a blank writing-tablet, made ready for the finger of God to 
carve such letters on him as he pleases. The more we refer ourselves to God, commit 
ourselves to him and reject ourselves, the greater we are worth. Ecclesiastes says: 
‘Accept all things in good part, just as they seem, just as they taste, day by day. The rest 
is beyond thy knowledge’:— [C] ‘Dominus novit cogitationes hominum, quoniam vanae 
sunt ’ [The Lord knoweth the thoughts of men, that they are vanity]. 

[A] And so two out of the three generic schools of Philosophy make an express 
profession of doubt and ignorance; it is easy to discover that most who belonged to the 
third school, the Dogmatists, put on an assured face merely because it looks better. They 
did not really think that they had established any certainties, but wanted to show us how 
far they had advanced in their hunt for Truth, [C] ‘quam docti fingunt, magis quam 
norunt’ [which the learned feign rather than know]. When Timaeus had to reveal to 
Socrates what he knew about the Gods, the world and mankind, he determined to speak 
of such things as one man to another: it would be enough if the reasons he gave had as 
much probability as anyone else’s, since precise reasons were neither in his grasp nor in 


531 


the grasp of any mortal man.— 

One of the followers of his school imitated him in these words: ‘Utpotero, explicabo: 
nec tamen, ut Pythius Apollo, certa ut sint et fixa, quae dixero; sed, ut homunculus, 
probabilia conjectura sequens’ [I will unravel things as best I may. What I shall say is 
neither fixed nor certain: I am no Pythian Apollo; I am a little man seeking the probable 
through conjecture]. Yet he was merely treating a common, not supernatural theme: 
contempt for death! In another place he translates Timaeus directly from Plato: ‘Si forte, 
de deorum natura ortuque mundi disserentes, minus id quod habemus animo 
consequimur, haud erit mirum. Aequum est enim meminisse et me qui disseram, hominem 
esse, et vos qui judicetis; ut, si probabilia dicentur, nihil ultra requiratis’ [If we are unable 
to achieve what we have in mind to do when we set out to treat the nature of the Gods 
and the origin of the world, that will not be surprising. It is right to remember that both 
I who am speaking and you who are judging are men. If what I say is probable, you can 
demand nothing more].— 

[A] Aristotle regularly piles up many different opinions and beliefs, so as to evaluate 
his own against them. He shows how much farther he has gone and how much nearer he 
has approached to probability - Truth not being something we should accept on 
authority or from the testimony of others. [C] (That is why Epicurus scrupulously 
avoided citing such evidence in his writings.) [A] Aristotle is the Prince of the 
Dogmatists; and yet it is from him we learn that greater knowledge leads to further 
doubt. You can often find him hiding behind a deliberate obscurity,— so deep and 
impenetrable that you cannot make out what he meant. In practice it is Pyrrhonism 
cloaked in affirmation. 

[C] Just listen to this assertion of Cicero, explaining to us another’s notion by his 
own: ‘Qui requirunt quid de quaque re ipsi sentiamus, curiosius id faciunt quant necesse 
est. Haec in philosophia ratio contra omnia disserendi nullamque rem aperte judicandi, 
profecta. Socrate, repetita ab Arcesila, confirmata a Carneade, usque ad nostram viget 
aetatem. Hi sumus qui omnibus veris falsa quaedam adjuncta esse dicamus, tanta 
similitudine ut in iis nulla insit certe judicandi et assentiendi nota. ’ [Those who want to 
know what my personal opinions are on each of these subjects are more inquisitive than 
they ought to be. Up to now it has been a principle of philosophy to argue against 
anything but to decide nothing. This principle was established by Socrates; Arcesilaus 
repeated it; Cameades strengthened it further... I am one of those who hold that there 
is, in all truths, an admixture of falsehood so like Truth that there is no way of deciding 
or determining anything whatever with complete certainty.]— 

[B] Not only Aristotle but most philosophers aim at being hard to understand; why? 


532 


- if not to emphasize the vanity of their subject-matter and to give our minds something 
to do! Philosophy is a hollow bone with no flesh on it: are they providing us with a place 
to feed in, where we can chew on it?— 

[C] Clitomachus maintained that he could not tell from Cameades’ books what his 
opinions were . 1 [B] That is why Epicurus avoided perspicuity in his writings and why 
Heraclitus was sumamed ^Koreivo^ ‘Dark’. Difficulty is a coin [C] which the learned 
conjure with, so as not to reveal the vanity of their studies and [B] which human 
stupidity is keen to accept in payment. 


Clarus, ob obscurant linguam, magis inter inanes, 
Omnia enint stolidi magis admirantur amantque 
Inversis quae sub verbis latitantia cernunt. 


[Clear was his fame, especially among the empty-headed, simply because his 
language lacked clarity: for stupid people are filled with awe and wonder when they find 
ideas wrapped up in words turned inside out.]— 

[C] Cicero reproached some of his friends with being accustomed to give more time 
than they were worth to such subjects as astrology, law, dialectic and geometry: it kept 
them away from the more useful and honourable of life’s duties. The Cyrenaic 
philosophers held physics and dialectic in equal contempt. At the very beginning of his 
books on the Republic Zeno pronounced all liberal disciplines to be useless. [A] 
Chrysippus said that what Plato and Aristotle wrote about logic must have been written 
for sport or as an exercise; he could not believe that they had anything serious to say on 
so empty a subject. [C] Plutarch makes a similar remark about metaphysics.— [A] 
Epicurus would have spoken similarly about rhetoric, grammar, [C] poetry, 
mathematics and all subjects of study other than physics - [A] and Socrates, about every 
one of them, with the sole exception of the study of how we should behave in this life. 
[C] Whatever question Socrates was asked, he first made the speaker give a detailed 
account of his way of life, both present and past; he made that the basis of his inquiries 
and judgements, believing as he did that any other approach was secondary to that and 
superfluous. 

Tarum mihi placeant eae literae quae ad virtutem doctoribus nihil profuerunt’ [I take 
no pleasure in the kind of writings which do not increase the virtue of those who teach 
them].— 

[A] Learning— itself has despised most disciplines, but men have thought it not 
inappropriate to train and entertain their minds even by studying subjects where nothing 


533 


solid is to be gained. Moreover, some have classified Plato as. Dogmatist; some, as a 
Doubter; others as both, depending on the subject. 

[C] Socrates, who takes the lead in the Dialogues, always asks questions designed to 
provoke discussion: he is never satisfied and never reaches any conclusion. He says that 
the only thing he knew how to do was to make objections. 

All schools of philosophy derive their foundations from Homer, but it was a matter 
of indifference to him what direction we then took; to show that, he gave equally good 
foundations to all of them. They say that ten distinct schools sprang from Plato. And 
indeed, as I see it, if his teachings are not faltering and unaffirmative, then I do not 
know whose are!— 

Socrates said that midwives were Sage-women who stop producing children of their 
own once they help others to do so; when, therefore, the gods conferred the title Sage on 
him, he too gave up his capacity for producing brain-children of his own by acts of 
manly love, in order to encourage and help other men to deliver theirs: he opened the 
genitals of their minds, lubricated the passages and made it easier for their child to issue 
forth; he then made an appreciation of that child, washed it, nursed it, strengthened it, 
swaddled it up and circumcised it. He used and exercised his own ingenuity: the others 
faced the perils and the risks.— 

[A] What I said just now is true of most other philosophers in the third category, 

[B] as the Ancients already noted in the writings of Anaxagoras, Democritus, 
Parmenides, Zenophanes and others: [A] their substance induces doubt; their purpose is 
inquiry rather than instruction, even though, in their works, they do at times interlard— 

[C] their style with Dogmatic cadences. Is that not equally true of both Seneca and 
Plutarch? Go into it closely and you see they are constantly talking from different points 
of view. As for those jurisconsults whose task it is to harmonize the various legal 
authorities, they first ought to harmonize each authority with himself. 

Plato seems to me to have quite knowingly chosen to treat philosophy in the form of 
dialogues: he was better able to expound the diversity and variety of his concepts by 
putting them appropriately into the mouths of divers speakers. Variety of treatment is as 
good as consistency. Better in fact: it means being more copious and more useful. 

Let us take one example from our own society. The highest degree of dogmatic and 
conclusive speaking is reached in parliamentary rescripts. Of the judicial decrees which 
French Parliaments hand down to the people, the ones which are most exemplary (and 
the most proper to encourage the respect which is rightly due to such high office, mainly 
on account of the ability of those who exercise it) do not draw their beauty from their 


534 


decisions as such. Decisions are everyday affairs, common to all judges. Their beauty 
lies in the disquisitions and that pursuit of varied and opposing arguments which legal 
matters can so well accommodate. 

When philosophers find fault with each other, their widest field of action lies in the 
internal contradictions and inconsistencies which entangle them all - either deliberately 
(so as to show the vacillations of the human mind over any subject whatever) or else 
quite unintentionally, because all matters are shifting and elusive. 

[A] What else can that refrain mean: ‘In slippery, shifting places, let us suspend our 
judgement’? For, as Euripides said, ‘The works of God, in divers ways, perplex us,’— 
[B] which is similar to the words which Empedocles strewed throughout his books when 
he was shaken as by divine mania and compelling truth: ‘No, no! We feel nothing: we 
know nothing! All things are hidden from us: we can determine the nature of nothing 
whatsoever,’ [C] words which conform to that holy saying: ‘Cogitationes mortalium 
timidae et incertae adinventiones nostrae et providentiae ’ [For the thoughts of mortal men 
are timorous, and our devices and foresight prone to fail].— 

[A] We ought not to find it strange that people who despair of the kill should not 
renounce the pleasure of the hunt: study is, in itself, a delightful occupation, so 
delightful that, among the forbidden pleasures which need to be held on a tight rein, the 
Stoics include pleasure arising from exercising the mind.— [C] They find intemperance 
in knowing too much. 

[A] Democritus ate some figs which tasted of honey. He at once began to rack his 
brains to try and explain this unusual sweetness. He was about to abandon his dinner 
and set out to trace and examine the place where the figs had been picked, when his 
servant-girl heard the cause of the commotion and began to laugh; she told him to stop 
worrying about all that, since she had put the figs in a jar which had previously held 
honey. He flew into a rage with her because she had deprived him of the chance of 
finding things out for himself and had robbed his curiosity of something to work on: 
‘Go away,’ he said, ‘you have offended me. I shall continue to look for the cause as 
though it were to be found in Nature.’ [C] And he did manage to find some sort of ‘true’ 
explanation for a false and imaginary fact! 

[A] This story about a great and famous philosopher clearly illustrates that passion 
for study which keeps us occupied, hunting after things we can never hope to catch. 
Plutarch relates a similar anecdote about a man who did not want anyone to enlighten 
him on a subject of doubt, so as not to lose the pleasure of the search - like that other 
man, who would not allow his doctor to cure a thirst brought on by fever, so as not to 
lose the pleasure of quenching it! [C] ‘Satins est supervacua discere quam nihil’ [Better 


535 


to learn something useless than nothing at all].— It is the same with food of all kinds. 
Sometimes we eat just for pleasure: there are things we eat which are neither nutritious 
nor sustaining. So too for the pabulum which our spirits draw from erudition: it may be 
neither nutritious nor sustaining, but it gives great pleasure. 

[B] This is how they put it: contemplating Nature supplies good food to the spirit: it 
replenishes it, helps it to soar aloft, makes it despise low and earthly things by 
comparing them with heavenly things. It is delightful merely to study great and abstruse 
subjects: that remains true even of the man who acquires nothing from study except a 
sense of awe and a fear of making judgements on such matters.— 

That, in a few words, is what they profess. 

An express image of the vanity of such sickly curiosity can be better seen from 
another example, which philosophers are always honouring themselves by quoting. 
Eudoxus prayed to the gods, hoping to be allowed to have just one sight of the sun from 
close at hand, so as to apprehend its shape, grandeur and beauty. Even if it meant being 
burned alive, he would pay the price. He wanted to leam, at the cost of his life, 
something he would lose as soon as he had acquired it. For such a brief and fleeting 
glimpse of knowledge he was prepared to surrender all the knowledge he already had or 
could later have acquired.— 

[A] I cannot really convince myself that Epicurus, Plato and Pythagoras genuinely 
wanted us to accept their Atoms, Ideas and Numbers as valid currency. They were too 
wise to base the articles of their belief on foundations so shaky and so challengeable. 
Each of these great figures strove to bring some image of light into the dark ignorance 
of this world; they applied their minds to concepts which had at least some subtle and 
pleasing appearance of truth, [C] their only proviso being that they could stand up to 
hostile objections: ‘unicuique ista pro ingenio finguntur, non ex scientiae vi’ [such 
theories are fictions, produced not from solid knowledge but from their individual 
wits].— 

[A] One of the Ancients was reproved for not judging philosophy to be of much 
account yet continuing to profess it; ‘That is what being a philosopher means,’ he 
replied.— Such men wanted to weigh everything in their mental balances; there is 
curiosity in all of us: this, they found, was a proper way to keep it occupied. Part of 
what they wrote was simply designed to meet the social needs of the general public - 
their accounts of their religion, for example.— With that end in view it was reasonable 
not to strip popularly held opinions of their living feathers. They had no wish to spawn 
ideas which would disturb the people’s obedience to the laws and customs of their land. 


536 


[C] When treating religion Plato plays a very open game. Writing in his own name 
he lays down nothing as certain, but, whenever he acts as Lawgiver, he adopts an 
assertive professorial style. Even then, he is bold enough to work in a few of his most 
fantastic notions (which were as useful for convincing the people as they were ridiculous 
for convincing himself), well aware how receptive our minds are to any impressions, 
especially to the wildest and most extraordinary ones. That explains why, in the Laws , 
Plato is careful to allow no poetry to be recited in public unless its fables and fictions 
serve some moral end: it is so easy to impress fancies on the human mind that it is not 
right to feed minds on useless, harmful lies, when you can feed them on profitable ones. 
In the Republic he says quite bluntly that you must often deceive the people for their 
own good.— 

You soon discover that some schools of philosophy were chiefly concerned to 
pursue truth, and others - gaining credit thereby - moral usefulness. Our human 
condition is pitiable: often, the things which strike our imagination as the most true are 
ones which appear least useful for the purposes of life. Even the most audacious of the 
schools, the Epicureans, the Pyrrhonians and the New Academy, are constrained in the 
end to bow to the laws of society. 

[A] There are other subjects which philosophers toss to and fro in their sieves, trying 
to dredge them (whether they deserve it or not) into some appearance of likelihood. 
Having discovered nothing so profound as really to be worth talking about, they are 
obliged to forge some weak and insane conjectures of their own, treating them not as 
bases for truth but for studious exercises. [C] ‘Non tarn id sensisse quod dicerent, quam 
exercere ingenia materiae difficultate videntur voluisse’ [They do not seem to believe 
what they say, but, rather, to exercise their wits on difficult material].— 

[A] If you will not take it that way, how else can we explain the obvious 
inconstancy, diversity and vanity of the opinions produced by such excellent and, 
indeed, awesome, minds? What can be more vain, for example, than trying to make 
guesses about God from human analogies and conjectures which reduce him and the 
universe to our own scale and our own laws, taking that tiny comer of intellect with 
which it pleases God to endow the natural Man and then employing it at the expense of 
his Godhead? And since we cannot stretch our gaze as far as the seat of his Glory, are 
we to drag him down to our corruption and our wretchedness? 

Of all the ancient opinions of men touching religion, it seems to me that the most 
excusable and verisirnilitudinous was the one which recognized God as some 
incomprehensible Power, the Origin and Preserver of all things, of all goodness and of 
all perfection, who took and accepted in good part, the honour and reverence which 


537 


human beings rendered him, under any guise, under any name and in any way 
whatsoever. 


[C] Jupiter omnipotens rerum, regumque deumque 
Progenitor genitrixque. 


[Almighty Jupiter, Father and Mother of the world, of rulers and of gods.]— 

Such devotion has always been regarded by Heaven with favour. 

All forms of government have profited from their allegiance to it; under it, men and 
impious deeds have met their just deserts; even pagan histories acknowledge the dignity, 
order and justice of the portents and oracles manifested in their fabulous religions for 
the benefit and instruction of men. With such temporal benefits as these God in his 
mercy may perhaps have deigned to protect those tender principles of rough-and-ready 
knowledge of Himself which Natural Reason affords us, amid the false imaginings of 
our dreams. But there are religions Man has forged entirely on his own: they are not 
only false but impious and harmful. 

[A] Of all the religions which St Paul found honoured in Athens, the most 
excusable, he thought, was the one dedicated to a hidden, ‘unknown God’.— 

[C] Pythagoras closely adumbrated truth when he concluded that any conception we 
have of that First Cause, of that Being of beings, must be free of limits, restrictions or 
definitions; it was in fact the utmost striving of our intellect towards perfection, each of 
us enlarging the concept according to his capacity. 

But if Numa really did attempt to make his people’s worship conform to this model, 
tying them to an entirely cerebral religion with no object set up before their eyes and no 
material elements mixed in with it, then his undertaking could serve no purpose.— The 
human mind cannot stand such wanderings through an infinity of shapeless thoughts: 
they must be brought together into some definite concept modelled on man. The very 
majesty of God allows itself to be, in some sense, circumscribed for us within physical 
limits: God’s sacraments are supernatural and celestial, yet they bear signs of our own 
condition, which is earthly; and we express our adoration in words and duties 
perceptible to the senses. After all, it is Man who does the believing and the praying. 

I shall leave aside other arguments marshalled on this topic; consider the sight of our 
crucifixes and the piteous chastisement which they portray; the ornaments and moving 
ceremonial in our churches; the voices so aptly fitted to the reverent awe of our 


538 


thoughts, and all the stirring of our emotions: you will have a hard time making me 
believe that such things do not set whole nations’ souls ablaze with a passion for religion, 
with very useful results. 

[A] Of all the deities to which bodies have been ascribed (as necessity required 
during that universal blindness), I think— I would have most willingly gone along with 
those who worshipped the Sun: 


la lumiere commune, 

L’ceil clu monde; et si Dieu au chef porte des yeux, 
Les rayons du Soleil sont ses yeux raclieux, 

Qui donnent vie a tous, nous maintiennent et gardent, 
Et les faicts des humains en ce monde regardent: 

Ce beau, ce grand soleil qui nous faict les saisons, 
Selon qu ’il entre ou sort de ses douze maisons; 

Qui remplit I’univers de ses vertus connues; 

Qui, d im traict de ses yeux, nous dissipe les nues: 

L’esprit, I’ame du monde, ardant et flamboyant, 

En la course d’un jour tout le Ciel tournoyant; 

Plein cl’immense grandeur, roncl, vagabond et ferine; 
Lequel dent clessoubs luy tout le monde pour terme; 
En repos sans repos; oysif, et sans sejour; 

Fils aisne de nature et le pere du jour. 


[... the Common Light, the Eye of the World; if God himself has eyes they are 
radiant ones made of the Sun’s rays which give life to all, protect and guard us meri, 
gazing down upon our actions in this world; this fair, this mighty Sun who makes the 
seasons change according to his journey through his dozen Mansions; who floods the 
earth with his acknowledged power; who, with a flicker of his eye disperses clouds; the 
Spirit and Soul of the World, ardent and aflame, encompassing the world in the course 
of one single day; full of immense grandeur, round, wandering and firm; who holds 
beneath him the boundaries of the world; resting, unresting; idle, never staying; the 
eldest Son of Nature and the Father of Light.]— 

Even leaving its grandeur and beauty aside, the Sun is the most distant part of the 
universe which Man can descry, and hence so little known that those who fell into 
reverent ecstasies before it were excusable. 

[C] Thales— was the first to inquire into such matters: he thought God was. Spirit 
who made all things out of water; Anaximander said that the gods are born and die with 
the seasons and that there are worlds infinite in number; Anaximenes said God was Air, 
immense, extensive, ever moving; Anaxagoras was the first to hold that the delineation 
and fashioning of all things was directed by the might and reason of an infinite Spirit; 


539 


Alcmaeon attributed Godhead to the Sun, the Moon, the stars and to the soul; 
Pythagoras made God into a Spirit diffused throughout all nature and from whom our 
souls are detached; for Parmenides God was a circle of light surrounding the heavens 
and sustaining the world with its heat; Empedocles made gods from the four natural 
elements of which all things are compounded; Protagoras would not say whether the 
gods existed or not or what they are if they do; Democritus sometimes asserted that the 
constellations and their circular paths were gods, sometimes that God was that Nature 
whose impulse first made them move; then he said our knowledge and our intellect were 
God; Plato’s beliefs are diffuse and many-sided: in the Timaeus he says that the Father 
of the world cannot be named; in the Laws he forbids all inquiry into the proper being 
of God: elsewhere, in these very same books, he makes the world, the sky, the heavenly 
bodies, the earth and our souls into gods, recognizing as well all the gods accepted by 
ancient custom in every country. Xenophon records a similar confusion in the teachings 
of Socrates: sometimes he has Socrates maintaining that no inquiry should be made into 
the properties of God; at other times he has him deciding that the Sun is God, that the 
soul is God, that there is only one God and then that there are many. The nephew of 
Plato, Speusippus, holds God to be a certain animate Power governing all things; 
Aristotle sometimes says that God is Mind and sometimes the World; at times he gives 
the world a different Master and sometimes makes a god from the heat of the sky. 
Zenocrates has eight gods: five are named after the planets; the sixth has all the fixed 
stars as his members, the seventh and eighth being the Sun and Moon. Heraclides of 
Pontus meanders along beneath these various notions and ends up with. God deprived of 
all sensation; he has him changing from one form to another and finally asserts that he is 
heaven and earth. Theophrastus is similarly undecided, wandering about between his 
many concepts, attributing the government of the world sometimes to Intelligence, 
sometimes to the sky and sometimes to the stars; Strato says God is Nature, giving birth, 
making things wax and wane, but itself formless and insensate; Zeno makes a god of 
Natural Law: it commands good, forbids evil and is animate; he dismisses the gods 
accepted by custom -Jupiter, Juno and Vesta; Diogenes of Apollonia says God is Time. 
Xenophanes makes God round, able to see and hear but not to breathe and having 
nothing in common with human nature; Ariston thinks that the form of God cannot be 
grasped: he deprives him of senses and cannot tell whether he is animate or something 
quite different. For Cleanthes God is sometimes Reason, sometimes the World, 
sometimes the Soul of Nature, sometimes absolute Heat surrounding and enveloping all 
things. Perseus, a pupil of Zeno’s, maintained that the name god was bestowed on 
people who had contributed some outstandingly useful improvements to the life of Man 
- or even on the improvements themselves. Chrysippus made a chaotic mass of all these 


540 



assertions and included among his thousand forms of gods men who had been 
immortalized. Diagoras and Theodorus bluntly denied that gods exist. Epicurus has 
shiny gods, permeable to wind and light, who are lodged between two worlds which 
serve as fortresses protecting them from being battered; they are clothed in human 
shape, with limbs like ours which are quite useless. 


Ego deum genus esse semper duxi, et dicam coelitum; 
Sed eos non curare opinor, quid agat humanum genus. 


[Personally I have always thought, and will always say, that a race of gods exists in 
heaven. But I do not think that they care about the actions of the human race.]— 

So much din from so many philosophical brainboxes! Trust in your philosophy now! 
Boast that you are the one who has found the lucky bean in your festive pudding! 

I have drawn some profit from the confusion of forms in the customs of the world: 
manners and concepts different from mine do not so much annoy me as instruct me; 
comparing them does not puff me up with pride but humbles me. There is for me no 
such thing as a privileged choice, except one coming expressly from the hand of God. 

I shall not go into monstrous and unnatural vice but on that subject the legislatures 
of this world are no less contradictory than the rival schools of philosophy. From that 
we can learn that Fortune herself is not more varied, fickle, blind and ill-advised than 
human reason. 

[A] Things we know least about are the ones we find most proper to deify.— [C] 
Making gods of men [A] as Antiquity did surpasses even the most extreme imbecility of 
reason. I would rather have followed those who worship the serpent, the dog and the 
bull; since the natures of such animals are less known to us, we are free to imagine them 
as we like and to endow them with extraordinary qualities. But the Ancients attributed 
to their gods our own condition - the imperfections of which we ought to know; they 
gave them desire, wrath, acts of vengeance, marriages, powers of generation and family 
trees, love, jealousy, bones and limbs like ours, our own feverish passions and pleasures, 
[C] our deaths and funerals. [A] The human intellect must have been astonishingly 
drunk to produce all that! 

[B] Quae procul usque adeo divino ab numine distant, 

Inque Deum numero quae sint indigna videri. 


[Things far removed from numinous deity, unworthy to appear among the Gods.] 


541 


[C] Formae, aetates, vestitus, ornatus noti sunt; genera, conjugia, cognationes 
omniaque traducta ad similitudinem imbecillitatis humanae: nam et perturbatis animis 
inducuntur; accipimus enim deorum cupiditates, aegritudines, iracundias’ [We know their 
faces, their ages, their vestments and their adornments. Their families, their marriages 
and their kinships are all reduced to the model of human weakness. They are even given 
troubled minds. We hear of the desires of the gods, of their sicknesses and of their fits 
of anger]. 

[A] Similarly they made gods [C] not only of Faith, Virtue, Honour, Concord, 
Freedom, Victory, Piety, but even of Pleasure, Fraud, Death, Envy, Old Age and 
Misery, [A] of Fear, Fever, Ill-Fortune and the other evils which beset our fragile and 
decaying lives: 

[B] Quid juvat hoc, templis nostros inducere mores? 

O curvae in terris animae et coelestium inanes! 


[What pleasure can be found from introducing our manners into our temples? O 
souls bowed earthwards, entirely void of things celestial!]— 

[C] With what unwise wisdom did the Egyptians forbid, under pain of hanging, that 
anyone should let it be known that their Gods Serapis and Isis had once been human: 
everybody knew then that they had been so! According to Varro effigies of these Gods 
were carved with their fingers on their lips to signify this mysterious command to their 
priests to hush up their mortal origins (otherwise all worship of them would inevitably 
be brought to naught).— 


542 


[A] Since man was so desirous of making himself the equal of God, it would have 
been better, said Cicero, to bring the properties of God down to earth and to turn them 
into human attributes rather than to send our wretchedness and corruption up to 
heaven.— But if you look at it aright, equally vain opinions have led Man, in various 
ways, to do both. 

When philosophers go into the hierarchy of their gods and rush to distinguish the 
alliances, attributes and powers of each of them, I cannot believe they are serious. 

When Plato deciphered for us the myth of the ‘Orchard of Dis’— telling us of the 
physical pleasures and pains awaiting us (after our bodies have decayed into nothing!); 
when he associated them with sensations experienced in this present life - 


Secreti celant calles, et myrtea circum 
Sylva tegit; curae non ipsa in morte relinquunt. 


[They hide away in secret glades, screened by myrtle groves on every side; even when 
dead their troubles do not leave them] - 

and when Mahomet promised his followers a paradise decked out with tapestries and 
carpets, with ornaments of gold and precious stones, furnished with voluptuous nymphs 
of outstanding beauty, with wines and choice foods to eat: I realized that they were both 
laughing at us, stooping low to tempt our brutish stupidity with sweet allurements, 
enticing us with notions and hopes appropriate to our mortal appetites. 

[C] Even some of our Christians have fallen into a similar error, promising 
themselves an earthly life after our resurrection, a life within time, accompanied by all 
kinds of worldly pleasures and comforts. [A] Plato’s thoughts were all of heaven; his 
familiarity with things divine was so great that the surname Divine has clung to him ever 
since;— are we to believe that even he thought there was, in a wretched creature like 
Man, something able to approach such incomprehensible Power? Did he believe that we, 
with our feeble grasp, could actually have a share in eternal blessedness or reprobation, 
or that our senses were robust enough to do so?— 

This is what we ought to say to him, on behalf of human reason: 

If the pleasures you offer me in the next life are related to ones I have experienced 
here on earth, that can have nothing to do with the Infinite. Even if my five natural 
senses were overwhelmed with joy; even if this soul of mine were seized of all the 
happiness she could ever hope for or desire, we know her limitations:— that would 
amount to nothing. Where there remains anything of mine, there is nothing divine. If 


543 


your promises merely relate to what can exist in our present condition, they cannot enter 
into the reckoning. [C] All the pleasures of mortals are mortal. [A] Take recognizing 
parents, children and friends in the next world: if that can touch us and titillate us, if we 
grasp at such pleasures as that, then we still remain within earthbound,— finite 
pleasures. We cannot condignly conceive those high, divine promises if we are able to 
conceive them at all. To imagine them condignly, we must imagine them unimaginable, 
unutterable, incomprehensible [C] and entirely different from our own wretched 
experiences. [A] ‘Eye cannot see’, says St Paul, ‘nor can there rise up in the heart of 
man, what God has prepared for his own. — And if (as you assert, Plato, with your 
‘purifications’) we have to modify our being in order to render ourselves capable of 
celestial joy, that would mean a change so extreme and so total that (as we know from 
Physics) we would cease to be ourselves: 


[B] Hector erat tunc cum bello certabat; at ille, 
Tractus ab Aemonio, non erat Hector, equo. 


[Hector was killed in battle: but it was not Hector who was dragged along by 
Achilles’ horse.] 

[A] Something else would receive our rewards. 


[B] quod mutatur, dissolvitur; interit ergo: 
Trajiciuntur enim partes atque ordine migrant. 


[When what is changed is loosened asunder, that is death. The elements are displaced 
and change their ordered places.]—” 

[A] Pythagoras thought up his metempsychosis in which souls change their dwelling- 
places: are we to think that the lion which is now housing the soul of Caesar has 
espoused the passions which moved Caesar, [C] or that it really is Caesar? And if it 
really were Caesar, then victory would lie with those who opposed Plato over this 
opinion, pointing out, among other absurdities, that a son might well find himself astride 
his mother, now clothed in the body of a mule.— 

Do we doubt [A] that, in such transmigrations as may take place within the same 
species, the newcomers are different from their forebears? They say that from the ashes 
of the Phoenix there is born first a worm and then another Phoenix; can anyone think 
that the second Phoenix is no different from the first? The worm which produces silk 
for us can be seen dying and shrivelling up: then, from that same body a butterfly 
appears; that produces another worm: it would be absurd to think it was still the first 


544 


one. That which once ceases to be no longer exists. 


Nee si materiam nostrum collegerit aetas 
Post obitum, rursumque redegerit ut situ nunc est, 
Atque iterum nobis fuerint data lumina vitae, 
Pertineat quidquam tamen ad nos id quoque factum, 
Interrupta semel cum sit repetentia nostra. 


[If Time, after we are dead, should gather our matter together and make it as it now 
is; if the light of life were again granted to us - even that would not concern us, once the 
thread of our memory has been snapped asunder.] 

You assert somewhere or other, Plato, that rewards in the life to come concern the 
spiritual part of man, but that remains just as unlikely. 


[B] Scilicet, avolsis radicibus, ut nequit ullam 
Dispicere ipse oculus rent, seorsum corpore toto. 


[For an eye torn from its socket and removed from its body can see nothing 
whatsoever.] 

[A] By your reckoning, it would no longer be Man who is touched by such Joy - no 
longer us: for we are built of two principal parts, which together form our being; to 
separate them is death and the collapse of our being. 


[B] Inter enim jecta est vitai pausa, vageque 
Deerrarunt passim motus ab sensibus omnes. 


[For life has been interrupted. No motions can affect our senses now; they are quite 
lost.] 

When the limbs a man had in life are eaten by worms and turning to dust we never 
say that the man is feeling pain: 


Et nihil hoc acl nos, qui coitu conjugioque 
Corporis atque animae consistimus uniter apti. 


[That is nothing to us. We are a union formed from the marriage and embrace of 
body and soul.]— 

Moreover, what just grounds do the gods have for noting and rewarding, after death, 


545 


a man’s good, virtuous deeds? Within that man it is the gods themselves who nurtured 
and produced them. And why are the gods offended by his vicious deeds? Why do they 
punish them? They themselves brought him forth in this faulty state; with a mere nod of 
their will they can prevent his failure.— 

Surely Epicurus, with every appearance of human rationality, could have raised such 
objections to Plato, [C] had he not already covered himself by his oft-repeated 
conclusion: ‘From mortal nature nothing certain can be inferred about the Immortal.’ 

[A] Human reason goes astray everywhere, but especially when she concerns herself 
with matters divine. Who knows that better than we do? For we have supplied Reason 
with principles which are certain and infallible; we light her steps with the holy lamp of 
that Truth which God has been pleased to impart to us; yet we can see, every day, that 
as soon as she is allowed to deviate, however slightly, from the normal path, turning and 
straying from the beaten track traced for us by the Church, she immediately stumbles 
and becomes inextricably lost; she whirls aimlessly about, bobbing unchecked on the 
huge, troubled, surging sea of human opinion. As soon as she misses that great public 
highway she disintegrates and scatters in hundreds of different directions. 

Man cannot be other than he is; he cannot have thoughts beyond his reach. [B] 
Plutarch says that it is greater arrogance for mere men to start talking and arguing about 
gods and demi-gods than for a man who knows nothing whatever about music to start 
criticizing singers, or for a man who has never been on a battlefield to try and argue 
about arms and war, from some trivial conjecture presuming to understand an art which 
far exceeds his knowledge.— 

[A] I believe that, in the Ancient World, men thought they were actually enhancing 
the greatness of God when they made him equal to Man, clothed him with Man’s 
faculties and made him a present of Man’s fair humours [C] and even of his most 
shameful necessities; [A] they offered him our food to eat, [C] our dances, mummeries 
and farces to amuse him; [A] our vestments to clothe him and our houses to dwell in, 
courting him with odours of incense, sounds of music and garlands of flowers; [C] they 
made him conform to our own vicious passions, subverting his justice in the name of 
inhuman vengeance, causing him to rejoice in the smashing and wasting of the very 
things he had created and protected (as Tiberius Sempronius did when he made a 
burned sacrifice to Vulcan of the arms and treasures seized as booty from his enemies 
in Sardinia; as Paul Aemilius did, when he sacrificed the spoils of Macedonia to Mars 
and Minerva, and as Alexander did, when he reached the shores of the Indian Ocean 
and sought the favour of Thetis by casting many huge golden jars into the sea).— More. 
They loaded his altars with butchered carcasses - not only of innocent beasts but of 


546 


men, [A] following the established custom of many peoples - including our own; no 
nation, I believe, is exempt: all have assayed it. 


[B] Sulmone creatos 

Quattuor hie juvenes, totidem quos educat Ufens, 
Viventes rapit, inferias quos immolet umbris. 


[He took alive four young men, begot by Sulmo, and another four bred by Ufens, to 
immolate them as sacrifices to the Shades.]— 

[C] The Getae think they are immortal; for them, dying is but a journey to their 
God Zamolxis. Every five years they dispatch one of their number to him to ask for 
what they need. The ambassador is chosen by lot. The actual dispatching takes this 
form: the man is told of his charge by word of mouth; three of those present hold three 
javelins upright, the others toss the man on to them. If some vital organ is impaled and 
he dies at once, that is a clear indication of divine approval. If he escapes death, he is 
thought to be evil and accursed, so another ambassador is similarly dispatched. 

On one occasion, when Amestris the mother of Xerxes had grown old and wished to 
appease some god of the Underworld, she caused fourteen young men from the best 
families in Persia to be buried alive, in accordance with the religious rites of that 
country. And even today the cement used to make the idols of Themistitan is mixed 
with the blood of little children, since the only sacrifices they relish are the pure souls of 
little boys: Justice hungry for innocent blood! 


Tantum relligio potuit suadere malorum. 


[So great are the evils Religion has encouraged. ]— 

[B] The Carthaginians sacrificed their own children to Saturn; those who had none 
of their own, bought some; their fathers and mothers had to attend the service, looking 
happy and contented. [A] It is a strange notion to seek to requite divine Goodness with 
our human affliction; the Spartans did: they courted that Diana of theirs with the 
suffering of boys who were flogged for her sake - sometimes flogged to death. It was a 
savage humour which sought to please the Architect by ruining what he had built; to 
ward off the punishment due to the guilty by punishing the innocent; or to believe that 
that poor wretched Iphigenia, by her sacrificial death in the port of Aulis, could free the 
Greek army of the weight of offences they had committed against God. 


547 


[B] Et casta inceste, nubendi tempore in ipso, 
Hostia concideret mactatn moesta parentis. 


[At the very time of her wedding, the pure was impurely slaughtered, a victim sadly 
murdered by her father.] 

[C] And there were the fair and noble souls of the two Decii, father and son, who 
threw themselves wildly into the thick of the enemy, as a propitiation to make the gods 
favour the affairs of Rome: ‘Quae fuit tanta deorum iniquitas, ut placari populo Romano 
non possent, nisi tales occidissent’ [What great wickedness on the part of the gods to 
refuse to favour the Roman People unless such men were killed!].— 

[A] We might add that it is not for the criminal to decide how and when he will be 
whipped: it is for the judge, who can only take account of such chastisements as he 
himself has ordered and who cannot treat as punishment anything that is pleasing to the 
sufferer. Both for the sake of its own justice and of our punishment, God’s vengeance 
must presuppose our complete resistance to it. 

[B] It was an absurd caprice on the part of Polycrates, the tyrant of Samos, to cast 
his most precious jewel into the sea to atone for his continuous run of good fortune by 
interrupting its course; he thought to placate the turning Wheel of Fortune with a 
carefully arranged disaster. [C] Fortune, to mock such absurdity, caused the jewel to be 
returned into his hands through the belly of a fish. 

[A] And then [C] what is the use of all those lacerations and loppings off of limbs 
practised by the Corybantes and Maenads, or, in our own day, by the Mahometans who 
slash their faces, their bellies and their limbs, to please their prophet, seeing that [A] the 
offence lies in the will not [C] in the breast, the eyes, the genitals, a well-rounded belly 
or in [A] the shoulders or the throat. [C] ‘Tantus est perturbatae mentis et sedibus suis 
pulsae furor, ut sic Dii placentur, quemadmodum ne homines quidem saeviunf [Such is 
their frenzy, arising from minds disturbed and forcibly unhinged, that it is thought the 
gods can be placated by surpassing even our human cruelty]. 

How we treat the natural fabric of our bodies concerns not only ourselves but the 
service of God and of other men. It is not right to harm it deliberately, just as it is 
wrong to kill ourselves on any pretext whatsoever. There is, it seems, both great 
treachery and great cowardice in whipping and mutilating the servile, senseless functions 
of our bodies in order to spare our souls the trouble of governing them reasonably: ‘Ubi 
iratos deos timent, qui sic propitios habere merentur? In regiae libidinis voluptatem 
castrati sunt quidam; sed nemo sibi, ne vir esset, jubente domino, manus intulit’ [What do 


548 


they think the gods are angry about, when they believe they can propitiate them thus? 
Some have been castrated to serve the lust of kings, but no one has ever emasculated 
himself, even at the command of his master]. [A] In this way they filled their religion 
with many bad deeds, 


saepius olim 

Relligio peperit scelerosa atque impia facta. 


[Too often in the past, religion has given birth to impious and wicked actions.] 

Nothing of ours can be compared or associated with the Nature of God, in any way 
whatsoever, without smudging and staining it with a degree of imperfection. How can 
infinite Beauty, Power and Goodness ever suffer any juxtaposition or comparison with a 
thing as abject as we are, without experiencing extreme harm and derogating from 
divine Greatness? [C] ‘Infirmum dei fortius est hominibus, et stultum Dei sapientius est 
hominibus’ [The weakness of God is stronger than men and the foolishness of God is 
wiser than men].— 

Stilpon the philosopher was asked whether the gods took pleasure in our homage 
and sacrifices: ‘You are most indiscreet,’ he replied; ‘if you want to talk about that, let us 
draw aside.’— [A] And yet we prescribe limits in the Infinite and besiege his mighty 
power with those reasons of ours (I call our ravings and our dreamings ‘reasons’, under 
the general dispensation of Philosophy who maintains that even the fool and the knave 
act madly ‘from reason’ - albeit from one special form of reason).— 

We wish to make God subordinate to our human understanding with its vain and 
feeble probabilities; yet it is he who has made both us and all we know. ‘Since nothing 
can be made from nothing: God could not construct the world without matter.’ What! 
Has God placed in our hands the keys to the ultimate principles of his power? Did he 
bind himself not to venture beyond the limits of human knowledge? Even if we admit, 
O Man, that you have managed to observe some traces of his acts here in this world, do 
you think that he has used up all his power by filling that work with every conceivable 
Form and Idea? You only see - if you see that much - the order and government of this 
little cave in which you dwell; beyond, his Godhead has an infinite jurisdiction. The tiny 
bit that we know is nothing compared with all: 


omnia cum coelo terraque manque 
Nil sunt ad summam summai totius omnem. 


[The entire heavens, sea and land are nothing compared with the greatest all of 


549 



all.]— 


The laws you cite are by-laws: you have no conception of the Law of the Universe. 
You are subject to limits: restrict yourself to them, not God. He is not one of your 
equals; he is not a fellow-citizen or a companion. He has revealed a little of himself to 
you, but not so as to sink down to your petty level or to make himself accountable for 
his power to you. The human body cannot fly up to the clouds - that applies to you! The 
Sun runs his ordered course and never stops still; the boundaries of sea and land can 
never be confounded; water is yielding and not solid; a material body cannot pass 
through a solid wall; a man cannot stay alive in a furnace; his body cannot be present in 
heaven, on earth and in a thousand places at once. It is for you that he made these laws; 
it is you who are restricted by them. God, if he pleases, can be free from all of them: he 
has made Christians witnesses to that fact. And in truth, since he is omnipotent, why 
should he restrict the measure of his power to definite limits? In whose interest ought he 
to give up being a Law unto himself? 

That Reason of yours never attains more likelihood or better foundations than when 
it succeeds in persuading you that there are many worlds: 


[B] Terramque, et solem, lunam, mare, caetera quae sunt 
Non esse unica, sed nurnero magis innumerali. 


[The earth, the sun, the moon and all that exists are not unique, but numerous beyond 
numbering.] 

[A] That belief was held by the most famous minds of former ages (and still is by 
some today), on grounds which, to purely human reason, seem compelling, because 
nothing else within the fabric of the universe stands unique and alone: 


[B] cum in summa res nulla sit una, 

Unica quae gignatur, et unica solaque crescat. 


[Since nothing bom of Nature is unique, nor when it grows is anything unique or all 
alone.] 

[A] There is some element of multiplicity within every species; it seems unlikely, 
therefore, that God made only this one universe and no other like it, or that all the 
matter available for this Form should have been exhausted on this one Particular: 


[B] Quare etiam atque etiam tales fateare necesse est 
Esse alios alibi congressus materiai. 


550 


Qucilis hie est avido complexu quem tenet aether. 


[Such things must be said again and again: there are, elsewhere, other material 
aggregates than the one which the air enfolds in her keen embrace.] 

[A] That is especially the case if the universe has a soul-something which its 
movements make credible, [C] so credible that Plato was sure of it; many Christians, 
too, either allow it or dare not disallow it, any more than the ancient opinion that the 
heavens, all heavenly bodies and other constituent parts of the universe are creatures 
composed of body and soul, subject to mortality, being composite, but immortal by the 
decree of their Maker.— 

[A] Now, if there are several worlds, as [C] Democritus, [A] Epicurus and almost 
the whole of philosophy have opined, how do we know whether the principles and laws 
which apply to this world apply equally to the others? Other worlds may present 
different features and be differently governed. [C] Epicurus thought of them as being 
both similar and dissimilar.— [A] Even within our own world we can see how mere 
distance produces infinite differences and variety. Neither wheat nor wine was found in 
those New Lands discovered by our fathers, nor any of our animals: everything there is 
different. [C] And only think of those parts of the world which, in times gone by, had 
no knowledge of Bacchus’ grapes or Ceres’ corn. 

[A] Should anyone care to believe Pliny [C] and Herodotus,— [A] there are species 
of men, in some places, which have very little resemblance to our own; [B] there are 
some ambiguous, mongrel forms, between the human and the beast; there are lands 
where men are born without heads, having eyes and mouths in their chests; there are 
androgynous creatures and creatures who walk on all fours, have only one eye in the 
middle of their forehead, or have a head more more like a dog’s than our own; some are 
fishes below the waist and live in water; some have wives who give birth at five and die 
at eight; other men have skin on their forehead and on the rest of their cranium so hard 
that iron spears cannot dent it but simply blunt themselves; there are men without 
beards, [C] peoples without the use or knowledge of fire and others who ejaculate black 
semen. 

[B] What about those people who, by natural means, can change into wolves [C] and 
mares [B] and back again? And [Al] even if you were to accept as true [A] what 
Plutarch says (that somewhere in the Indies there are men without mouths who sustain 
themselves by inhaling certain smells) how many of our own descriptions today are 
certainly wrong!— If laughter were no longer the property of Man and if Man were no 
longer a political animal able to reason, our conception of what our inner disposition 


551 


and causations are would be largely irrelevant.. .— 

To go further, we have imposed our own commandments on Nature and carved 
them in stone: yet how many things do we know which defy those fine rules of ours! 
And yet we try to bind God by them! 

How many things are there which we call miraculous or contrary to Nature? [C] All 
men and nations do that according to the measure of their ignorance. [A] How many 
quintessences, how many occult properties have we discovered! For us, following 
Nature means following our own intelligence as far as it is able to go and as far as we 
are able to see.— Everything else is a monster, outside the order of Nature! By that 
reasoning the cleverest and wisest men would find everything monstrous, since they are 
convinced that reason has no foundation to stand on, not even to determine [C] whether 
snow is white (Anaxagoras said it was black), or whether there are such things as 
knowledge and ignorance (Metrodorus of Chios denied that Man could ever know), [A] 
or even whether we are alive: Euripides hesitates, ‘Is life this life that we live now? Or is 
life really what we call death?’ That is: 

Tic, S'oiSev ei (f/v x ox>0' o KEKAtjxai Oavetv , 

TO (>/V St OvElOKEl V la Tl 233 233 

[B] There is a degree of probability in that alternative: for why do we give the name 
existence to that instant which amounts to no more than a flash of lightning against the 
infinite course of eternal light, or to that tiny break which interrupts the condition which 
is naturally ours for all eternity, [C] since death fills everything before that moment and 
everything which comes afterwards as well as a large part of the moment itself? 

[B] Some swear that nothing moves and that there is no such thing at all as motion - 
[C] as was believed by the followers of Melissus (since, as Plato proves, there is no 
place for spherical motion within strict Unity, nor even for movement from one place to 
another) - [B] or that there is, in Nature, no generation and no corruption. [C] 
Protagoras says that in Nature nothing exists but doubt: that everything is equally open 
to discussion, including the assertion that everything is equally open to discussion; 
Nausiphanes holds that among phenomena there is nothing which is rather than is not : 
that nothing is certain but uncertainty. For Parmenides, within the world of phenomena 
there is no such thing as genus: there is only Unity. For Zeno, there is not even Unity, 
only Nothing: for if Unity exists it must exist either within another or within itself; if it 
exists in another, that makes two; if it exists within itself, that still makes two - the 
container and the thing contained. 

According to these tenets, Nature is but a shadow, false or vain.— 

[A] It has always seemed to me that certain expressions are too imprudent and 


552 


irreverent for a Christian: ‘God cannot die’; ‘God cannot change his mind’; ‘God cannot 
do this or cannot do that’. I find it unacceptable that the power of God should be limited 
in this way by the rules of human language; these propositions offer an appearance of 
truth, but it ought to be expressed more reverently and more devoutly. Our speech, like 
everything else, has its defects and weaknesses. Most of the world’s squabbles are 
occasioned by grammar! Law-suits are born from disputes over the interpretation of 
laws; most wars arise from our inability to express clearly the conventions and treaties 
agreed on by monarchs. How many quarrels, momentous quarrels, have arisen in this 
world because of doubts about the meaning of that single syllable Hoc.— 

[B] Take the proposition which Logic asserts to be the clearest of all. If you say ‘The 
weather is fine’ and you say it truly, then the weather is fine. That seems to be clear 
enough; and yet such a formula can lead us astray. You can see that from the following 
example: if you say, ‘I lie’, and you say it truly, then you lie! In both cases, the art, 
reason and force of the conclusion are the same: yet the second leaves you stogged in 
the mud!— 

[A] Pyrrhonist philosophers, I see, cannot express their general concepts in any 
known kind of speech; they would need a new language: ours is made up of affirmative 
propositions totally inimical to them - so much so that when they say ‘I doubt’, you can 
jump down their throats and make them admit that they at least know one thing for 
certain, namely that they doubt. To save themselves they are constrained to draw an 
analogy from medicine: without it their sceptical humour would never get purged! When 
they say I know not or I doubt that affirmation purges itself (they maintain) along with 
all the others, exactly like a dose of rhubarb, which evacuates all our evil humours, itself 
included.— 

[B] (Scepticism can best be conceived through the form of a question: ‘What do I 
know?’ - Que sgay-je, words inscribed on my emblem of a Balance.)— 

[A] See how people avail themselves of such forms of speech as are full of 
irreverence. In our present religious strife, if you press your adversaries too hard they 
will bluntly reply that it exceeds God’s power to make his body be in paradise and in 
several places on earth all at the same time. How that scoffer— among the Ancients 
exploited similar assertions! ‘At least’, he said, ‘it is no light comfort for Man to know 
that God cannot do everything! God cannot kill himself when he wants to (which is the 
greatest prerogative attached to the human condition); he cannot bring the dead back to 
life; he cannot make someone not to have lived who has lived, or not to have received 
honour who has received honour; he has no jurisdiction over the past other than to make 
it merge into oblivion; finally (so that this equality of status in God and Man can be 


553 


further strengthened with amusing examples), God cannot even stop ten and ten from 
making twenty!’ That is what he says - and what should never pass a Christian’s lips. 
Whereas, on the contrary, men seem to me to go looking for such insane and arrogant 
terms in order to cut God down to their own size: 


eras vel atra 

Nube polum pater occupato, 

Vel sole puro; non tamen irritum 
Quodcumque retro est, efficiet, neque 
Diffinget infectumque reddet 
Quod fugiens semel horn vexit. 


[Tomorrow the Father can cover the pole with black clouds or with pure sunlight, but 
he cannot change the past, he cannot undo or annul anything that fleeting time has 
home away.] 

When we say that countless ages - ages past and ages yet to come - are but a 
moment to God and that God’s essence consists in goodness, wisdom, power, we utter 
words, but our intelligence cannot grasp the sense. Despite that, we, in our arrogance, 
want to force God through human filters. All the raving errors that this world possesses 
are bred from trying to squeeze on to human scales weights far beyond their capacity: 
[C] ‘Mirum quo procedat improbitas cordis humani, parvulo aliquo invitata successu ’ [It 
is astonishing how far the impudence of the human heart can go, once encouraged by 
the least success]. 

How insolently the Stoics taunt Epicurus for holding that essential goodness and 
happiness belong to God alone, so that the Sage can only possess some shadowy likeness 
of them. [A] How rashly they subject God to Destiny (would that some who bear the 
name of Christians did not do so still);— Thales, Plato and Pythagoras even make God 
the slave of Necessity. This fierce desire to scan the Divine through human eyes even 
brought one of our own great Christian figures to endow God with a corporeal shape;— 
[B] it also explains why we daily assign to God a peculiar responsibility for any event, 
the outcome of which seems important to us. We attach particular weight to such 
events, so God must do so too, paying more attention to them than to others which seem 
unimportant to us or simply part of the regular order: [C] ‘magna dii cur ant, parva 
negligunt!’ [The gods take care of great matters and neglect the small!] Listen to the 
example given and you will see more clearly what is meant: ‘nec in regnis quidem reges 
omnia minima curant’ [Even kings in their kingdoms do not concern themselves with 
every tiny detail]. As though it were more difficult for God to shake an empire than to 
shake a leaf, or as though his Providence were exercised differently when influencing 


554 


the outcome of a battle and the jump of a flea. 

The hand of God’s governance supports all things with an equal and unchanging 
sway, with the same order, the same power. Our concerns contribute nothing to this; our 
human activities and standards are quite irrelevant: ‘Deus ita artifex magnus in magnis, ut 
minor non sit in parvis’ [In great things God is a great artificer, but in such a way that he 
is no less great in little things]. 

Our arrogance constantly finds fresh ways of blasphemously equating man with 
God: our jobs are a burden to us men, so Strato endows the gods - and their priests - 
with complete immunity from work! For Strato it is Nature who produces and maintains 
all things, Nature who constructs every part of the universe with her weights and her 
forces. In this way he frees mankind of a burden: the fear of divine judgement: ‘Quod 
beatum aeternumque sit, id nec habere negotii quicquam, nee exhibere alteri’ [A blessed 
and eternal Being has no duties and imposes none on others].— 

‘Nature’s will is that like things should have like correlatives; for example: the fact 
that mortals are innumerable leads to the conclusion that the immortals are too; the vast 
number of things which kill or do harm leads to the conclusion that an equivalent 
number preserve and do good’; so, just as the souls of the gods have no tongue, eyes or 
ears yet can understand each other and also judge what we are thinking: so too the souls 
of men, when free from the bonds of the body in sleep or any kind of ecstasy, have 
powers of divination, can foretell the future and see such things as they could never see 
when joined to their bodies... [A] ‘Men’, says St Paul, ‘have become fools, professing to 
be wise, and have changed the glory of the incorruptible God into the image of 
corruptible man’.— 

[B] Only consider what jugglers’ farces those ‘deifications’ were among the 
Ancients. After the stately pride and pomp of the funeral procession, just as the fire was 
taking hold of the apex of the pyre and about to engulf the litter with the dead man on 
it, they would release an eagle which flew upwards, representing the soul making its way 
to Paradise. We still possess a thousand medallions (above all, the one of that - oh, so 
honourable - woman Faustina) where the eagle is portrayed bearing off the deified soul, 
which is slung over its shoulder just like a dead goat! It is pitiful the way we deceive 
ourselves with the monkey-tricks that we invent; 


Quod finxere timent 


[They are terrified of their own creations] 


555 


- like children who are scared by the very face of the friend they have just daubed 
with black. [C] ‘Quasi quicquam infelicius sit homine cui sua figmenta dominantur’ [As 
though anything were more pitiful than a man overmastered by his own figments].— 

We are far from honouring him who made us when we honour a creature we 
ourselves have made. 

[B] Augustus had more temples than did Jupiter, in which he was served with just as 
much devotion and just as much belief in his miracles. 

The Thasians, wishing to repay the benefits they had received from Agesilaus, came 
to tell him that they had put him on the canonical list of their gods. ‘Are you a people’, 
he asked, ‘who have the power to make a god of anyone you please? Just to see, first 
make a god of one of yourselves; and then, [C] when I have learned how he has 
prospered, [B] I will come and thank you heartily for your offer.’ 

[C] Man is indeed out of his mind. He cannot even create a fleshworm, yet creates 
gods by the dozen. Just listen to Hermes Trismegistus praising our sufficiency: ‘Among 
all the things which can astonish us, one thing has surpassed astonishment itself: Man’s 
capacity to discover what the Divine nature is and then proceed to create it.’ 

[B] Here are some arguments from the very school in which Philosophy learned her 
lessons: 


Nosse cui Divos et coeli numina soli, 
Aut soli nescire, datum 


[Philosophy, she to whom alone it is given to know the gods and the numinous 
powers of heaven, or, alone, to know that they cannot be known!]— 

- If God exists, (she says) he is animate; if he is animate he has senses; if he has 
senses, he is subject to corruption! If he is incorporeal, he has no soul and consequently 
is without activity; if he is corporeal, then he is mortal! What a triumph! - [C] We 
could never make this world; therefore a Nature even more excellent than ours must have 
taken the task in hand! - It would be stupid arrogance to esteem ourselves the most 
perfect object in the universe: there must therefore be one thing better: God! - When 
you see a rich and stately dwelling you may not know who the master of it is, but at least 
you could say that it was not built for rats: take the divine architecture of the palaces of 
heaven, which we ourselves can see; does it not oblige us to believe that it is the 
dwelling-place of a Master greater even than we arel - Is not the higher always more 
worthy - and we are at the bottom. - Nothing without reason and soul can beget an 


556 


animate creature capable of reason: the world has begotten us: therefore it has both 
reason and soul! - Each part of us is less than the whole: we are part of the world: the 
world is, therefore, provided with wisdom and reason more abundantly than we are. - It 
is a fair thing to hold great powers of government: the government of the world must, 
therefore, belong to some happy Nature. - The heavenly bodies do us no harm: they are, 
therefore, full of goodness. - [B] We need food: so do the gods, who feed on vapours 
rising up from here below! - [C] Worldly goods are not goods to God: therefore they are 
not goods to us. - To do harm and to experience harm are equal proofs of weakness: it 
is therefore mad to be afraid of God! - God is good by nature, man by industry: which 
makes man superior! - There is no difference between divine wisdom and human 
wisdom, except that the divine is eternal: but time adds nothing to the quality of 
wisdom: therefore we and God are on equal footing! [B] We enjoy life, reason, freedom 
and we esteem goodness, love and justice: therefore these qualities must be in God! 

In short, both constructively and destructively, we forge for ourselves the attributes 
of God, taking ourselves as the correlative. What a model, what a pattern! Take human 
qualities and stretch them, raise them, magnify them as much as you please! Wretched 
little Man, puff yourself up as much as you like! More. More. More still: ‘Non si te 
ruperis, inquif... [‘Not even’, he said, ‘if you burst.’]. [C] ‘Profecto non Deum, quem 
cogitare non possunt, sed semet ipsos pro illo cogitantes, non ilium sed se ipsos non illi sed 
sibi comparand [Indeed, Men cannot conceive of God, so they base their conceptions on 
themselves instead; they do not compare themselves to him, but him to themselves].— 

[B] Even within Nature, effects barely suggest half their causes. But what of this 
Cause? God is a Cause completely above the order of Nature. His mode of being is too 
high, too distant, too magisterial to allow our logical conclusions to judge or to bind 
him. We shall never get that far by our own efforts: our path is too lowly. We are no 
nearer the heavens on the top of Mount Cenis than we are at the bottom of the sea. 
Your astrolabe will tell you that. 

Yet men even reduce God to having sexual intercourse with women, noting how 
often he did it and for how many births. 

Paulina, the wife of Saturninus, was a Roman matron of great reputation; she 
thought she was lying with a god, Serapis, but through the pimping of the temple-priests 
she found herself in the arms of a lover.— [C] In his treatises on theology, Varro, the 
most subtle and learned of Latin authors, wrote of a sexton in the temple of Hercules 
who cast dice with both hands, one for himself, the other for Hercules. The stakes were 
a supper and a woman: if he won, he paid for them out of the collection; if he lost, he 
paid for them himself. He lost; so the cost of the woman and dinner fell to himself. 


557 


Now the woman was called Laurentina; lying that night with this ‘god’ in her arms, she 
heard him volunteer the remark that the first man she met when she left in the morning 
would see that she received from heaven the money she had just earned. She did in fact 
meet a rich young man called Taruntius who took her back home and eventually left her 
all his money. She in her turn, hoping to do an action pleasing to this god, left her 
inheritance to the Roman People, who then bestowed divine honours upon her.— 

As though it were simply not enough that Plato should be descended, on both sides, 
from the gods, with Neptune as the common ancestor, it was believed as a fact in Athens 
that, when Ariston had wished to consummate his love for the fair Perictione, he could 
not bring it off; he was warned in a dream by the god Apollo not to deflower her but to 
leave her a virgin until she had given birth... And they were Plato’s father and 
mother!— 

How many other accounts are there of similar cuckoldries procured by the gods 
against wretched human beings, or of husbands unjustly defamed to honour their 
children! In the religion of Mahomet the people believe that there are ‘Merlins’ in plenty 
- children, that is, begot without fathers, spiritual children divinely conceived in virgins’ 
wombs. (They are given a special name which, in their language, means just that.)— 

[B] We should note that no creature holds anything dearer than the kind of being 
that it is [C] (lions, eagles, dolphins value nothing above their own species) [B] and that 
every species reduces the qualities of everything else to analogies with its own. We can 
extend our characteristics or reduce them, but that is all we can do, since our intellect 
can do nothing and guess nothing except on the principle of such analogies; it is 
impossible for it to go beyond that point. [C] That explains Ancient philosophical 
conclusions such as these: Man is the most beautiful of all forms, so God must also have 
that form! - No one can be happy without virtue; virtue cannot be without reason: no 
reason can dwell elsewhere but in the human shape: therefore God is clad in a human 
shape! ‘Ita est informatum, anticipation mentibus nostris ut homini, cum de Deo cogitet, 
forma occurrat humana’ [The mould and prejudice of our minds are such that when we 
think of God it is the human form which occurs to them].— 

[B] That is why Xenophanes said with a smile that if the beasts invent gods for 
themselves, as they probably do, they certainly make them like themselves, glorifying 
themselves - as we do.— For why should a gosling not argue thus: ‘All the parts of the 
universe are there for me: the earth serves me to waddle upon, the sun to give me light; 
the heavenly bodies exist to breathe their influences upon me; the winds help me this 
way, the waters, that way: there is nothing which the vault of Heaven treats with greater 
favour than me. I am Nature’s darling: does not Man care for me, house me, serve me? 


558 


It is for me that Man sows and grinds his corn; it is true that he eats me, but he also eats 
his fellow-men, and I eat the worms which kill him and eat him.’ 

A crane could say the same - even more majestically on account of the freedom of 
its flight and its secure enjoyment of those fair and higher regions: [C] ‘Tam blanda 
conciliatrix et tam sui est lena ipsa natura’ [So flattering a procuress is Nature, such a 
seductress of herself].— 

[B] Well, if that is how it goes, the Universe and the Fates are all for us! The 
lightning flashes for us; the thunder crashes for us; the Creator and all his creatures exist 
just for us. We are the end which the entire Universe is aiming towards. Just examine 
the records of celestial affairs which Philosophy has kept for two thousand years and 
more: the gods have acted and spoken only for Man. Philosophy attributes no other 
concern to them, no other employment: they go to war against us, 


domitosque Herculea manu 
Telluris juvenes, unde periculum 
Fulgens contremuit domus 
Saturni veteris. 


[The Sons of Earth, those Titans at whose assault the shining house of ancient Saturn 
shook with fear, are defeated by the hand of Hercules.] 

The gods side with us in our civil disturbances, [C] to return our services, since we 
have so often taken sides in theirs: 


[B] Neptunus muros magnoque emota tridenti 
Fundamenta quatit, totamque a sedibus urbern 
Emit. Hie Juno Scaeas saevissima portas 
Prima tenet. 


[With his mighty trident Neptune shakes the walls of Troy to their foundations and 
dashes the whole city to the ground; here, implacable Juno holds the Scaean gates.] 

[C] On their feast-days, the Caunians, jealous for the hegemony of their own gods, 
load weapons on their shoulders and charge around the outskirts of their city stabbing 
their swords into the air, fighting the foreign gods to the finish and driving them out of 
their lands.— 

[B] The powers of the gods are tailored to meet our human needs: this one cures 
horses, another, men; [C] this one, the plague, [B] that one, the ring-worm, that one, the 
cough; [C] this one cures one sort of mange; that one, another: ‘adeo minimis etiam 


559 


rebus prava religio inserit deos’ [Thus does religion, when depraved, bring the gods even 
into the most trivial affairs]; [B] this god makes grapes to grow, another, garlic; this god 
is responsible for lechery, that one, for trade, [C] (each tribe of craftsmen has its god!); 
[B] this god’s sway and reputation lie in the East; that god’s lie in the West. 


hie illius anna, 
Hie currus fuit; 


[Here were her arms, here stood her chariot;] 

[C] O Sancte Apollo, qui umbilicum certum terrarum obtines; 

[O holy Apollo, thou that holdest sway in the Navel of the world;] 


Pallada Cecropidae, Minoia Creta Dianam, 
Vulcanum tellus Hipsipilea colit, 


Junonem Sparte Pelopeiadesque Mycenae; 
Pinigerum Fauni Maenalis ora caput; 
Mars Latio venerandus. 


[The descendants of Cecrops worship Pallas in Athens; Minoan Crete worships 
Diana; Lemnos, Vulcan; Sparta and Peloponnesian Mycenae, Juno. Pan, crowned with 
pine leaves, is venerated in Maenalus; and Mars in Latium.] 

[B] This god has only a single town or family under his sway, [C] that one lives 
alone, but the other one, willingly or from necessity, lives with his peers: 


Junctaque sunt magno templa nepotis avo. 

[The grandson’s temple is amalgamated with the temple of his grandsire.]— 

[B] Some of these gods are so mean and so lowly (for their number amounts to 
thirty-six thousand) that you need a pile of five or six of them to make a grain of corn - 
their various names are taken from this - [C] you need three for a door (one for the 
wood, one for the hinge, one for the doorstep); then you need four for an infant 
(protecting its cradle, its drink, its food and its sucking). The functions of some are 
uncertain and doubtful; others are not allowed into Paradise yet: 


Quos quoniam coeli nondum dignamur honore, 


560 


Quas dedimus certe terras habitare sinamus. 


[Since some are not yet worthy to be honoured with paradise, we at least allow them 
to dwell in the lands we have given them.] 

There are nature-gods, poetic gods, civic gods; there are intermediary beings, half? 
way between the divine nature and the human, who are mediators, doing business 
between us and God and worshipped with an inferior, second-grade worship; they have 
innumerable titles and duties. Some are good: some are bad. [B] There are gods who are 
old and decrepit; there are gods who are mortal; for Chrysippus considered that all gods 
died in the last great conflagration of the world, except Jupiter. 

[C] Man invents a thousand amusing links of fellowship between himself and God. 
Is God not a fellow-Countryman! ‘Jovis incunabula Creten’ [Crete, cradle of Jupiter].— 

Here is the justification given after reflection by Scaevola, a great Pontifex, and by 
Varro, a great theologian (both ‘great’ in their time): it is necessary (they said) that 
people should not know many things which are true and should believe many things 
which are false, ‘cum veritatem qua liberetur, inquirat, credatur ei expedire, quod fallitur 
[since man only wants to find such truth as sets him free, it can be thought expedient for 
him to be deceived] .— 

[B] Human eyes can only perceive things in accordance with such Forms as they 
know. [C] We forget what a tumble the wretched Phaeton took when, with a mortal 
hand, he tried to manage the reins of his father’s horses: our rashness causes our minds 
to take a similar plunge and to be bruised and broken as he was.— [B] Ask Philosophy 
what the Sky and the Sun are composed of; what will she answer, if not iron, or, [C] 
with Anaxagoras, [B] stone, or some such everyday material? If you ask Zeno what 
Nature is, he replies Fire - an artificer having as its properties generative powers and 
regularity; if you ask Archimedes (the master of geometry, that science which grants 
itself precedence over all others in matters of truth and certainty) he replies that the Sun 
is a god of burning iron. What a fine idea to come out of geometrical demonstrations, 
with their beauty and compelling necessities! Not so compelling [C] and useful, though, 
[B] but that [C] Socrates thought you only need to know enough geometry to survey any 
land given or acquired; [B] the illustrious Polyaenus (formerly a famous teacher of 
geometry) came to despise its demonstrations as false and manifestly vain; that was after 
tasting the sweet fruits of the idle gardens of Epicurus.— 

[C] In Antiquity Anaxagoras was believed to have excelled all others in treating 
matters celestial and divine; but in Xenophon, Socrates, talking of his teaching, said that 
the brain of Anaxagoras finally became disturbed: that often happens to those who 


561 


immoderately pore over matters which do not appertain to them.— 

As for Anaxagoras’ making the Sun a burning stone, he failed to realize that stone 
does not glow in the fire, or, what is worse, that it is consumed by fire; as for his making 
the Sun and Fire one, he further failed to realize that fire does not blacken those who 
simply look at it, that we can gaze fixedly at fire, or that fire kills plants and grasses. 
Socrates’ verdict - and mine as well - is that the best judgement you can make about the 
heavens is not to make any at all.— 

When Plato in the Timaeus was about to talk about daemons he declared: This is an 
undertaking which is beyond our range; we are obliged to have faith in men of old who 
said they were born of daemons: it is not reasonable to refuse to believe these children 
of the gods - even though what they say is not supported by compelling reasons or by 
verisimilitude - since they swear they are talking about matters known within their 
homes and families.. .— 

[A] Now let us see whether we have a little more light than that concerning our 
knowledge of Man and Nature. 

When treating objects which, by our own admission, exceed our knowledge, is it not 
stupid to go forging bodies for them and imposing on them false Forms of our own 
invention? - as in the case of the movement of the planets: since our minds cannot 
manage to conceive what makes them move naturally, we impose on them our own 
heavy corporeal, material principles: 


temo aureus, aurea summae 
Curvatura rotae, radiorum argenteus ordo. 


[The shaft was of gold; so too the rim of the wheels and the spokes were made of 
silver.]— 

It is almost as though we had sent coach-smiths, carpenters [C] and painters [A] up 
there, preparing mechanical contrivances with diverse movements [C] and then, in 
accordance with Plato’s instructions, arranging, round about the spindle of Necessity, 
sets of wheels and interlaced courses for the heavenly bodies, variously painted.— 


[B] Mundus domus est maxima rerum, 
Quam quinque altitonae fragmine zonae 
Cingunt, per quam limbus pictus bis sex signis 
Stellimicantibus, altus in obliquo aethere, lunae 
Bigas acceptat. 


562 


[The Universe is an edifice, immense, encircled by five thundering belts and crossed 
obliquely by an aethereal sash, decorated with twice half-dozen constellations and the 
paired horses of the Moon.]— 

These are dreams [C] and frantic folly. [A] If only Nature would deign to open her 
breast one day and show us the means— and the workings of her movements as they 
really are [C] (first preparing our eyes to see them). [A] O God, what fallacies and 
miscalculations we would find in our wretched science! [C] Either I am quite mistaken 
or our science has not put one single thing squarely in its rightful place, and I will leave 
this world knowing nothing better than my own ignorance. It was in Plato (was it not?) 
that I came across the inspired adage, ‘Nature is but enigmatic poetry,’ as if to say that 
Nature is intended to exercise our ingenuity, like a painting veiled in mists and obscured 
by an infinite variety of wrong lights .— ‘Latent ista omnia crassis occultata et circumfusa 
tenebris, ut nulla acies humani ingenii tanta sit, quae penetrare in coelum, terrain intrare 
possit’ [All things lie hidden, wrapped in a darkness so thick that no human mind is 
sharp enough to pierce the heavens or to sound the earth]. Certainly, philosophy is 
poetry adulterated by Sophists. Where do all those Ancient authors get their authority 
from, if not from the poets? The original authorities were themselves poets; they treated 
philosophy in terms of poetic art. Plato is but a disjointed poet. As an insult, Timon 
called him a great contriver of miracles.— 

[A] When their natural teeth are missing, women use false ones made of ivory; they 
replace their real complexion by one contrived from borrowed materials; they pad out 
their thighs with cloth or felt, round out their bellies with cotton-wool and, as everyone 
knows and sees, enhance themselves with a false and borrowed beauty. 

Learning does the same; [B] even our system of Law, they say, bases the truth of its 
justice upon legal fictions. Learning pays us in the coin of suppositions which she 
confesses she has invented herself. Those eccentric and concentric epicycles by which 
Astrology tries to make sense out of the motions of the heavenly bodies are presented to 
us merely as the best she can produce; all Philosophy does the same, presenting us not 
with what really is, nor even with what she believes to be true, but with the best 
probabilities and elegancy she has wrought.— [C] Take Plato, explaining the attributes 
of the bodies of men and beasts, ‘We would be certain that what we say is true, if we 
could have it confirmed by an oracle; as it is, we can only be certain that I have spoken 
with the greatest appearance of truth that I can find.’— 

[A] Philosophy does not only impose her ropes, wheels and contrivances on to the 
high heavens. Just think for a while what she says about the way we humans are 
constructed. Lor our tiny bodies she has forged as many retrogradations, trepidations, 


563 


conjunctions, recessions and revolutions as she has for the stars and the planets. They 
are right to call our bodies Microcosms (‘little worlds’) seeing all the various pieces and 
angles they need to build them up and cement them together. To house all the activities 
which they find in Man and all the various functions and faculties which we are aware of 
within us, think of all the sections into which they have subdivided our souls and how 
many organs they have ascribed to them; think of all the storeys and levels and all the 
duties and activities they have assigned to us, over and above the natural ones which our 
poor humanity can actually perceive! They have invented an entire Republic! Man is an 
object to be seized and handled. Each philosopher, according to his fancy, has been left 
entirely free to unstitch him, rearrange him, put him together again and furnish him out 
afresh. 

Yet even now they have not overmastered him. They cannot even dream up an 
ordinance for Man - let alone find out a true one - without there being some sound or 
cadence which they cannot quite fit in, however abnormal— they make their contrivance 
and however much they try and botch it up with a thousand false and fantastical patches. 
[C] It is wrong to find excuses for them. We do indeed condone artists who represent 
the sky and far-off lands, seas, mountains or islands with a few slight brush-strokes; we 
do not know what they are like so are happy with the shadowy imitations that they feign; 
but when they paint from nature on a known subject - one which we are familiar with - 
we require of them a perfect, detailed representation of the lines and colours. If they 
fail, we despise them.— 

[A] I have always felt grateful to that girl from Miletus who, seeing the local 
philosopher Thales with his eyes staring upwards, constantly occupied in contemplating 
the vault of heaven, made him trip over, to warn him that it was time enough to occupy 
his thoughts with things above the clouds when he had accounted for everything lying 
before his feet. It was certainly good advice she gave him, to study himself rather than 
the sky; [C] for, as Democritus says through the mouth of Cicero, ‘Quod est ante pedes, 
nemo spectat: coeli scrutantur plagas’ [Nobody examines what is before his feet: they 
scrutinize the tracts of the heavens]. 

[A] But in fact, the human condition is such that, where our understanding is 
concerned, the things we hold in our hands are as far above the clouds as the heavenly 
bodies are! [C] As Socrates says in Plato, you can make against anyone concerned with 
Philosophy exactly the same reproach as that woman made against Thales: he fails to see 
what lies before his feet. No philosopher understands his neighbour’s actions nor even 
his own; he does not even know what either of them is in himself, beast or Man.— 

[A] These people, now, who find Sebond’s arguments to be too feeble, these know- 


564 


alls who are ignorant of nothing and make rules for the whole Universe - 


Quae mare compescant causae; quid temperet annum; 
Stellae sponte sua jussaeve vagentur et errent; 

Quid premat obscurum lunae, quid proferat orbem; 

Quid velit et possit rerum concordia discors; 


[What limits the seas to their confines, what regulates the years: whether the 
heavenly bodies travel and wander freely or by constraint; what makes the dark orb of 
the Moon to wax or wane, or what the discordant concord of all things can mean or 
bring about] - - 

have they never, among all their books, plumbed the difficulties which confront them 
in understanding their own being? Some things can be seen easily enough: our finger 
and foot are capable of motion; some of our members move on their own while others 
move only when we make them do so; certain impressions produce a blush, others 
pallor; some thoughts act on the spleen, others on the brain; some make us laugh, others 
weep; some stun our minds into ecstasies and arrest the movements of our limbs; [C] 
there are objects which make our gorges rise, others which raise up something lower 
down. [A] But no man has yet discovered how purely mental impressions like these can 
effect such deep incursions into objects as massively solid as our bodies nor the nature 
of the linking sutures by which these astonishing stimuli are transmitted: [C] ‘Omnia 
incerta ratione et in naturae majestate abdita ’ [All things remain unknown to reason and 
are hidden in the majesty of Nature], says Pliny; and St Augustine: ‘Modus quo 
corporibus adhaerent spiritus, omnino mirus est, nec comprehendi ab homine potest: et 
hoc ipse homo est' [How the spirit adheres to the body is entirely a matter of wonder and 
cannot be understood by Man; nevertheless this union of body and spirit is Man].— 

[A] And yet everybody knows the answer! Merely human opinions become accepted 
when derived from ancient beliefs, and are taken on authority and trust like religion or 
law! We parrot whatever opinions are commonly held, accepting them as truths, with all 
the paraphernalia of supporting arguments and proofs, as though they were something 
firm and solid; nobody tries to shake them; nobody tries to refute them. On the 
contrary, everybody vies with each other to plaster over the cracks and prop up received 
beliefs with all his powers of reason - a supple instrument which can be turned on the 
lathe into any shape at all. Thus the world is pickled in stupidity and brimming over 
with lies. 

We do not doubt much, because commonly received notions are assayed by nobody. 
We never try to find out whether the roots are sound. We argue about the branches. We 


565 


do not ask whether any statement is true, but what it has been taken to mean. We ask 
whether Galen said this or said that: we never ask whether he said anything valid. 

It is understandable that this curb on our freedom of judgement and this tyranny 
over our beliefs should spread to include the universities and the sciences: Aristotle is 
the god of scholastic science: it is heresy to discuss his commandments (as it once was 
to discuss those of Lycurgus in Sparta). What Aristotle taught is professed as law - yet 
like any other doctrine it may be false. Where the first principles of Nature are 
concerned I cannot see why I should not accept, as soon as the opinions of Aristotle, the 
‘Ideas’ of Plato, the atoms of Epicurus, the plenum and vacuum of Leucippus and 
Democritus, the water of Thales, the infinity of Nature of Anaximander, or the aether 
of Diogenes, the numbers and symmetry of Pythagoras, the infinity of Parmenides, the 
Unity of Musaeus, the fire and water of Apollodorus, the homogeneous particles of 
Anaxagoras, the discord and concord of Empedocles, the fire of Heraclitus, or any other 
opinion drawn from the boundless confusion of judgement and doctrines produced by 
our fine human reason, with all its certainty and perspicuity, when it turns its attention 
to anything whatever. 

Aristotle based the principles of Nature on three elements: matter, form and 
privation. Yet what is more silly than actually to make a vacuum into one of the causes 
of the production of material objects? Privation is a negative: what fanciful humour led 
Aristotle to make it the original cause of objects which actually exist? Yet, except as an 
exercise in logic, nobody dares to shake that belief. Nobody debates anything to increase 
doubt but only to defend the founding author of their school against outside objections; 
his authority marks the goal; beyond it, no further inquiry is permitted.— 

Base yourself on admitted postulates and you can build up any case you like; from 
the rules which order the original principles the remainder of your construction will 
follow on easily without self-contradiction. 

This method allows us to bowl our arguments with the jack in view (and so be 
satisfied that our foundations are rational ones); before they even begin, our professors 
(like geometricians with their postulated axioms) establish such a hold over our beliefs 
that they can subsequently reach any conclusion they want. We give them our agreement 
and consent: they can then pull us this way and that way, spinning us about at will. Once 
we accept anyone’s postulates he becomes our professor and our god: for his foundations 
he will grab territory so ample and so easy that, if he so wishes, he will drag us up to the 
clouds. In the practice and business of scholarship we have accepted Pythagoras’ 
contention as legal tender: every expert, he says, must be believed in his own speciality. 
So, for the meaning of words the logician turns to the grammarian; for the matter of his 


566 


arguments the rhetorician borrows from the logician; the poet takes his rhythms from 
the musician; the geometer takes his propositions from the arithmetician; the 
metaphysicians make their foundations out of the conjectures of physics. For their 
principles, all branches of learning take admitted postulates, which restrain human 
judgement on every side. If you come up against the barrier behind which their error of 
principle is sheltering, they have an axiom ready on their lips: Never argue with those 
who deny first principles.- But there can be no first principles unless God has revealed 
them; all the rest - beginning, middle and end - is dream and vapour. 

Whenever a case is fought from preliminary assumptions, to oppose it take the very 
axiom which is in dispute, reverse it and make that into your preliminary assumption. 
For any human assumption, any rhetorical proposition, has just as much authority as any 
other, unless a difference can be established by reason. So they must all be weighed in 
the balance - starting with general principles and any tyrannous ones. [C] To be 
convinced of certainty is certain evidence of madness and of extreme unsureness: no 
people are more insane or less philosophical than the ‘lovers of opinion’ whom Plato 
dubbed philodoxoi .— [A] We want to find out by reason whether fire is hot, whether 
snow is white, whether anything within our knowledge is hard or soft. There are ancient 
stories of the replies made to the man who doubted whether heat exists - they told him 
to jump into the fire - or to the one who doubted whether ice is cold - they told him to 
slip some into his bosom: but a reply like that is quite unworthy of the professed aims of 
philosophy. Philosophers could have spoken in this way only if they had left us in a state 
of nature, simply accepting external appearances as they offer themselves to our senses, 
or if they had left us to follow our basic appetites, governed only by such modes of 
being as we are born with. But they themselves have taught us to make judgements 
about the universe; they themselves have fed us with the notion that human reason is the 
Comptroller-General of everything within and without the vault of heaven; they 
themselves say that it can embrace everything, do everything and is the means by which 
anything is known or understood. Such replies would be good among the Cannibals who 
live long and happy lives, in peace and tranquility, without the benefits of Aristotle’s 
precepts and without even knowing what the word ‘physics’ means. Perhaps such a reply 
could even be better and more firmly based than all the ones which philosophers owe to 
reason or discovery. Such arguments would be within the capacity of ourselves, of all 
the animals and of all for whom the pure and simple law of Nature still holds sway. But 
they themselves have renounced such arguments. They must not tell me: ‘This is true; 
you can see it is; you can feel it is.’ What they must tell me is whether I really and truly 
feel what I think I feel; and if I do feel it, they must go on and tell me why and how and 
what: let them tell me the name, origin, connections and frontiers of heat or of cold and 


567 


what qualities are found in the agents and patients of heat and of cold. Otherwise, let 
them abandon their professional intention, which is to accept nothing and approve 
nothing except by following the ways of reason. When they have to assay anything, 
reason is their touchstone. But it is, a most surely, a touchstone full of falsehood, error, 
defects and feebleness. How better to test that than by reason itself. If we cannot trust 
reason when talking about itself, it can hardly be a judge of anything outside itself. 

If human reason knows anything at all, it must be its own essence and its own 
domicile. It is domiciled within the soul, being either a part of it or one of its activities - 
as for the permanent home of that true and essential Reason, whose name we steal 
under false colours, it is in the bosom of God: that is the habitation where it dwells; that 
is where it comes from when it pleases God to allow us to have a glimmer of Reason, 
like Pallas leaping from the head of her Father to make herself known unto the world. 

Now let us see what human reason can tell us about itself and about the soul! [C] I 
am not talking now of that generic soul, in which virtually all philosophy makes the 
heavenly bodies and the elements to share; nor of that soul which Thales, prompted by 
his study of the magnet, attributes to objects normally considered inanimate; I am 
concerned with the soul which belongs to us, the one we should know best: 


[B] Ignoratur enim quae sit natura animai, 
Nata sit, an contra nascentibus insinuetur, 

Et simul intereat nobiscum morte dirempta, 

An tenebras orci visat vastasque lacunas, 

An pecudes alias divinitus insinuet se. 


[The nature of the soul is not known; whether it is innate or, on the contrary, slipped 
into creatures at the moment of their birth; does it die when we die, does it visit the 
darkness and the vast depths of Orcus, or else does it, under divine guidance, slip into 
animals different from ouselves?]— 

[A] Reason taught Crates and Dicaearchus that there is no soul (bodies being 
endowed with natural power of movement); it taught Plato that the soul is a self-moving 
substance; Thales, that soul is a natural substance, never in repose; Asclepiades, an 
exercising of the senses; Hesiod and Anaximander, a substance composed of fire and 
water; Parmenides, of earth and fire; Empedocles, of blood: 


- Sanguineam vomit ille animam 


[He vomits up his soul of blood]- 


568 


Possidonius, Cleanthes and Galen, that the soul is heat or a hot complexion - 


Igneus est ollis vigor, et coelestis origo 
[Souls have a fiery vigour and a heavenly origin] - 


Hippocrates, a spirit spread throughout the body; Varro, air, infused through the 
mouth, warmed in the lungs, refreshed in the heart and spread throughout the body; 
Zeno, the quintessence of four elements; Heraclides of Pontus, light; Xenocrates and the 
Egyptians, number in motion; the Chaldeans, a power of indeterminate form: 


[B] habitum quemdam vitalem corporis esse, 
Harmonium Graeci quam dicunt. 


[There is a certain life-giving quality in the body which the Greeks call Harmony.]— 

[A] And let us not overlook Aristotle, who said the soul was that power which 
naturally moved the body and which he called entelechia (as dull an idea as anyone 
else’s, for he does not mention the essence, origin or nature of the soul but merely notes 
what it does). Lactantius, Seneca and the better part of the Dogmatists all confessed that 
they did not know what it was. [C] And after running through all these opinions, Cicero 
comments: ‘Harum sententiarum quae vera sit, deus aliquis viderit’ [It is up to some god 
or other to say which of these is true]. [A] ‘I know from myself’, said St Bernard, ‘how 
incomprehensible God is: I cannot even comprehend the constituents of my own being.’ 
[C] Heraclitus held that everything is full of souls and daemons; he nevertheless 
maintained that whatever advances we may make in our knowledge of the soul, we 
would never get to the end, since its essence is too profound.— 

[A] There is just as much disagreement and argument about the seat of the soul: 
Hippocrates and Hierophilus lodge it in the ventricle of the brain; Democritus and 
Aristotle, throughout the body - 


[B] Ut bona saepe valetudo cum dicitur esse 
Corporis, et non est tarnen haec pars ulla valentis. 


[As we often say that a man has a healthy body, without implying that health is part 
of a healthy man.] - 

[A] Epicurus lodges it in the stomach - 


569 


[B] Hie exultat enim pavor ac metus, haec loca circum 
Laetiticie mulcent; 


[For terror and fear make the stomach tremble, while joys soothe its pains;]— 

[A] the Stoics lodge it within and around the heart; Erasistratus, adjoining the 
membrane of the epicranium; Empedocles, in the blood - like Moses, who for this 
reason forbade men to ‘eat the blood’ of beasts (whose soul is within the blood);— 
Galen thought that each part of the body had its own soul; Strato lodged it between the 
eyebrows: [C] ‘Qua facie quidem sit animus, aut ubi habitet, ne quaerendum quidem esf 
[As for the aspect of the soul and the place wherein it dwells, we should not even try to 
inquire]. - I gladly let that fellow Cicero use his own words (should I dare to 
contaminate the utterances of Eloquence!) and there is little to gain from stealing the 
substance of his own ideas, which are neither frequent, sound nor unknown.— 

[A] But the reason which led Chrysippus and others of his sect to make a case out 
for the heart is not to be forgotten: it is (he says) because, when we want to swear an 
oath, we place our hand upon our bosom, and when we want to pronounce the word eyo) 
(which means ‘I’) we lower our jaw towards our chest. This passage should not be 
allowed to slip by without a remark about such silliness in so great a person. Even if you 
leave aside the total lack of weight in the argument as such, his last proof could only 
convince Greeks that their soul is where he said it is. No man’s judgement is so alert as 
never to nod off to sleep!— [C] Why are we afraid to say so? Here are the Stoics, the 
fathers of human wisdom, finding that, when a man is buried under the weight of a 
fallen building, his soul cannot extricate itself but makes lengthy struggles to get free - 
like a mouse in a trap! 

Some— maintain that the world was made specifically to give bodies to souls, as a 
punishment for having wilfully fallen from their original purity; at first they were simply 
incorporeal; they are given light or heavy bodies, depending upon how far they have 
withdrawn from their original spiritual state (which explains the great variety of created 
matter). The spirit who, as a punishment, was invested with the body of the Sun must 
have fallen off in some very rare and special way! 

The frontiers of our research are lost in dazzling light. Plutarch, writing of the 
fountain-heads of history, says that when we push our investigations to extremes, they 
all fall into vagueness, rather like maps where the margins of known lands are filled in 
with marshes, deep forests, deserts and uninhabitable places.— That explains why the 
most gross and puerile of rhapsodies are to be found among thinkers who penetrate 
most deeply into the highest matters: they are engulfed by their curiosity and their 


570 


arrogance. 

The beginnings and the ends of our knowledge are equally marked by an animal-like 
stupor: witness Plato’s soarings aloft in clouds of poetry and the babble of the gods to be 
found in his works. Whatever was he thinking about when he [A] defined Man as an 
animate creature with two legs and no feathers? He furnished those who wanted to 
laugh at him with an amusing opportunity for doing so. For, having plucked a live 
capon, they went about calling it ‘Plato’s Man’.— 

And the Epicureans too. With what simple-mindedness they first imagined that the 
universe had been formed by their atoms (which, they said, were bodies having some 
weight and a natural downward movement) until their opponents reminded them that, by 
their own description, it was impossible for these atoms to link up together: their fall, 
being straight and perpendicular, could only be effected along parallel lines. This 
obliged them to add a quite fortuitous sideways motion, and to furnish their atoms with 
curved hooks on their tails by which they could link themselves firmly to each other. [C] 
Even then, they were in trouble from others, who hounded them with another 
consideration: if atoms do, by chance, happen to combine themselves into so many 
shapes, why have they never combined together to form a house or a slipper? By the 
same token, why do we not believe that if innumerable letters of the Greek alphabet 
were poured all over the market-place they would eventually happen to form the text of 
the Iliad? 

That which is capable of reasoning, argued Zeno, is superior to that which is not: 
nothing is superior to the Universe, therefore the Universe is capable of reasoning. Cotta 
used the same argument to make the Universe into a mathematician and another 
argument of Zeno’s to make it into a musician - an organist. The whole is greater than 
the part: we, who are parts of the Universe, are capable of wisdom: therefore the 
Universe is wise.— 

[A] One can find innumerable examples— of similar arguments which are not only 
false but inept and unable to hold together, emphasizing that their inventors were not so 
much ignorant as silly; you can find them in the criticisms which philosophers make of 
each other in their clashes of opinion and in the disagreements between Schools. 

[C] Anyone who made an intelligent collection of the asinine stupidities of human 
Wisdom would have a wondrous tale to tell. I like collecting such things as evidence 
which, from some angles, can be studied as usefully as sane and moderate opinions. [A] 
We can judge what we should think of Man, of his sense and of his reason, when we 
find such obvious and gross errors even in these important characters who have raised 
human intelligence to great heights. Personally I prefer to believe that they treated 


571 


knowledge haphazardly, sporting with it, in any fashion, like a toy and that they played 
with reason as if it were some vain and frivolous instrument, putting forward all kinds of 
thoughts and fantasies, some forceful, others, weak. The selfsame Plato who defined 
Man as a capon, elsewhere follows Socrates and says that, in truth, he does not know 
what Man is, and that Man is one of the hardest things in the world to understand.— 
With such varied and unstable opinions they lead us tacitly by the hand to inconclusive 
conclusions. They profess that they do not present the face of their thought openly and 
unveiled; they hide it beneath obscurities of poetic fable or behind some other mask. 
Our imperfection is such that raw meat is not always proper food for our stomachs: it 
first has to be dried, treated or hung. They do the same: they sometimes take their 
straightforward opinions and judgements and hide them behind obscurity [C] and 
season them with falsehood, [A] so as to prepare them for public consumption. They do 
not want to make an express avowal of the ignorance and weakness of human reason - 
[C] they want to avoid frightening the children - [A] but they give us a good glimpse of 
it beneath the appearance of confused and unstable erudition. 

[B] when I was in Italy, I advised a man who was at pains to learn Italian that if it 
were merely to be understood, without excelling in any other way, he should simply use 
the first words which came to his lips, Latin, French, Spanish or Gascon, and stick an 
Italian ending on them; he would never fail to hit on some local dialect, Tuscan, Roman, 
Venetian, Piedmontese or Neapolitan: there are so many forms that he was bound to 
coincide with one of them. I say the same about Philosophy. She has so many faces, so 
much variety and has been so garrulous, that all our ravings and our dreams may be 
found within her. Human fancy can conceive nothing, good or evil, which is not there 
already. [C] ‘Nihil tam absurde did potest quod non dicatur ab aliquo philosophorum’ 
[Nothing can be so absurd that it has not already been said by one of the 
philosophers].— [B] So I am all the more ready to give a free run to my own whims in 
public: I know they were born to me, not modelled on others, but you can always find 
some Ancient or other whose fantasies are akin to them. There will always be somebody 
to say, ‘Look, he got it from there.’ 

[C] My ways of life are natural to me: in forming them I have never never called in 
the help of any erudite discipline; but when I was seized with the desire to give a public 
account of them, weak as they are, I made it my duty to help them along with precepts 
and examples, so that I could publish them more decorously. I was then astonished 
myself to find that, by sheer chance, they were in conformity with so many 
philosophical examples and precepts. Only after my life was settled in its activity did I 
learn which philosophy was governing it! A new character: a chance philosopher, not a 
premeditated one! 


572 


[A] To get back to our souls,— Plato placed reason in the brain, anger in the heart, 
desire in the liver; but that probably resulted from an interpretation of the emotions of 
the soul rather than from any desire to divide the soul up into separate parts; it was more 
like one body with several members. The most likely of all these opinions states that the 
human soul is one single entity with the faculties for ratiocinating, remembering, 
comprehending, judging and desiring; it exercises its other functions through the 
instrumentality of the various parts of the body (just as the seaman sails his vessel 
according to his experience of it, at times tightening or slackening a sheet, at others 
hoisting the yard or pulling the oar, one single power organizing all these actions); the 
seat of this power is the brain, as is clearly shown by the fact that wounds and accidents 
affecting the head immediately harm the faculties of the soul; it is not inappropriate, 
therefore, that this power should extend from the brain to the rest of the body— - 


[C] medium non deserit unquam 
Coeli Phoebus iter; radiis tamen omnia lustrat. 


[Phoebus never deserts his path through the sky, yet bathes all things with light from 
his rays] - 

just as the Sun in the sky pours out its light and its powers and fills the whole 
universe: 


Caetera pars animae per totum dissita corpus 
Paret, et ad numen mentis nomenque movetur. 


[The remainder of the soul, scattered throughout the body, obeys, and is activated by 
the majesty and authority of the mind.]— 

Some said that there is a general Soul, like some huge body, from which individual 
souls were extracted, later returning there to be re-absorbed in that universal matter: 


Deum namque ire per omnes 
Terrasque tractusque maris coelumque profundum: 
Hincpecudes, armenta, viros, genus onine ferarum, 
Quemque sibi tenues nascentem arcessere vitas; 
Scilicet hue reddi deinde, ac resoluta referri 
Omnia: nec morti esse locum; 


[For God is said to spread through all lands, all tracts of sea and highest heaven; from 
him all flocks and herds and men and every race of beast ah take, at birth, their tenuous 


573 


lives, and to him all things eventually return, when they are loosened asunder: and so 
there is no place at all for death;]— 

others said that the individual souls merely rejoined this general Soul - attached to it, 
but as individuals; others said that souls were produced from the divine substance itself; 
others, from fire and water, by angels; some said they existed from the earliest times; 
others, that they were created only when actually required. Some said they came down 
from the circle of the Moon and later returned there. Most of the Ancients held that, 
exactly like all other natural things, they were engendered from father to son, adducing 
as an argument the resemblance of sons to their fathers:— 


Instillata patris virtus tibi: 
Fortes creantiir fortibus et bonis. 


[Your father’s virtue is transmitted to you; strong men are born from strong men and 
good.]— 

Not only physical characteristics were held to flow like this from father to son but 
similar humours, complexions and inclinations of the soul: 


Denique cur acris violentia triste leonum 
Seminium sequitur; dolus vulpibus, etfuga cervis 
A patribus clatur, et patrius pavor incitat artus; 
Si non certa suo quia semine seminioque 
Vis animi pariter crescit cum corpore toto? 


[Finally, why is impetuous ferocity the hereditary mark of the dire lion family, 
trickery of the fox and swiftness of the deer (which inherits the paternal instinct towards 
timorous flight) if not because the soul is born from semen and grows with the rest of 
the body?] 

This was held to be the basis of divine Justice which readily visits upon the children 
the sins of the fathers, because the pollution of the fathers’ vices is to some extent 
imprinted upon the souls of their children, who are influenced by their fathers’ unruly 
desires.— 

Moreover if souls do not come from natural succession but by some other way - if, 
say, they existed beforehand as entities independent of their bodies - they would have 
had some memory of their former state, given that reflection, reason and memory are 
the natural properties of the soul: 


574 


[B] si in corpus nascentibus insinuatur, 

Cur superante actam aetatem meminisse nequimus, 
Nec vestigia gestarum rerum ulla tenemus? 


[If souls are only introduced into the bodies at birth, why cannot we fully remember 
what happened before nor retain any trace of the things which we did?]— 

[A] If we are to give the value we wish to the attributes of our souls, we are obliged 
to assume that, even in their natural simplicity and purity, they are full of knowledge; 
free from the prison of the body, our souls, therefore, must be such, before they entered 
their bodies, as we hope they will be once they have gone forth from them; so, while 
they are in the body, they must continue to remember that knowledge: hence Plato’s 
assertion that whatever we learn is really the recollection of what we once knew. But we 
all know that to be false from our own experience. First: we remember nothing save 
what we have been taught; if memory did its duty ‘purely’, it would at least hint at 
something beyond our apprenticed knowledge. Second: what the soul knew in her pure 
state was true knowledge: since her intelligence was divine, she knew things as they 
really are; here below you can make the soul accept lies and errors, if you teach them to 
her. She cannot be using her powers of recollection in that case, since she had never 
accommodated such Forms and concepts! 

But to say that her imprisonment in the body smothers her native faculties so 
completely as to snuff them right out, runs, first of all, contrary to that other belief: that 
we can recognize her powers to be so great, and those of her workings which we are 
conscious of in this life to be so wonderful, that they allow us to conclude that she is 
divine, has existed from all eternity and will enjoy immortality. 


[B] Nam, si tantopere est animi mutata potestas 
Omnis ut actarum exciderit retinentia rerum, 

Non, ut opinor, ea ab leto jam longior errat. 


[For if all the faculties of the soul are so completely changed that no memory of the 
past remains, that seems to me to be no different from extinction.]— 

[A] Moreover, the powers and actions of our souls must be examined not elsewhere 
but here, at home in our bodies. Any other perfections they may have are useless and 
irrelevant; it is for their present state that their whole immortality will receive its 
acknowledged rewards: each is entirely accountable for the life of a human being. But it 
would be an act of gross injustice to lop off the soul’s powers and resources, to strip her 
of all her weapons and then to take the very time when she lies weak and ill in prison - 


575 


a time of repression and constraint - and to make that the basis for a judgement leading 
to endless, everlasting punishment; it would be unjust to limit consideration to so short a 
span, to a life that may have lasted a mere two hours or, at the very worst a hundred 
years - an instant in proportion to infinity - and then, from that momentary interlude, to 
order and establish, once and for all, the whole state of her future existence. To reward 
or punish on the basis of so short a life would be disproportionate and iniquitous. 

[C] To get out of this difficulty, Plato wants future rewards and punishments never 
to exceed a hundred years and always to be proportionate to the actual length of a man’s 
life. Quite a few Christians too have imposed temporal limits on to them.— 

[A] As a result of all this men followed Epicurus and Democritus (whose opinions 
were most widely received); they concluded that the generation and life of the soul 
shared all the usual characteristics of things human. Many striking features make this 
seem probable: they could see that the soul was born precisely when the body was 
capable of receiving her; that her strength increased as the body’s did: it was observed 
that the soul was weak in infancy and then, eventually, experienced a vigorous maturity, 
a decline into old age and, finally, decrepitude: 


gigni pariter cum corpore, et una 
Crescere sentimus, pariterque senescere mentem. 


[We can feel that the soul is born with the body, grows up with it and then grows 
old.]— 

Man perceived that the soul can experience various passions and be disturbed by 
several emotions which subject her to pain and lassitude; she is capable of change, 
including change for the worse; she is capable of joy, tranquillity, languor; like the 
stomach or the foot, she is subject to wounds and illness: 

[B] mentem sanari, corpus ut aegrum 
Cemimus, etflecti medicina posse videmus. 

[We see that the mind can be cured like the body and be modified by drugs.] 

[A] She can be confused and dazed by the powers of wine, be upset by the vapours 
of a burning fever; be lulled to sleep by certain drugs and aroused by others: 


[B] corpoream naturam animi esse necesse est, 
Corporeis quoniam telis ictuque laborat. 


576 


[The nature of the mind is necessarily corporeal, for it can be hurt by physical cuts 
and blows.] 

[A] Men saw that all the soul’s faculties can be stunned and overthrown by the mere 
bite of a sick dog; that the soul has no way of avoiding any of these accidents, even by 
showing the utmost firmness of mind or any moral quality or virtue, by philosophical 
determination or by any straining of her forces. Let the saliva of some wretched dog 
slaver over the hand of Socrates and they knew that it would put a sudden end to all his 
wisdom and to all his mighty, disciplined thought, reducing them to nothing, so that no 
trace whatever would remain of his original awareness: 

[B] vis animai 


Conturbatur,... et divisa seorsum 
Disjectatur, eodem illo distracta veneno. 


[The power of the soul is disturbed and its parts are broken up and dispersed by that 
same poison.] 

[A] They knew that the poison would find no greater powers of resistance in his soul 
than in a four-year-old’s: if Philosophy herself became incarnate, such a poison would 
make her lose her senses and drive her insane. Cato could wring the neck of Death and 
Destiny, but if ever he had been bitten by a mad dog and contracted that illness which 
doctors call hydroforbia, m even he would have been overcome with fear and terror, 
quite unable to bear the sight of water or a looking-glass. 


[B] vis morbi distracta per artus 
Turbat agens animam , spumantes aequore salso 
Ventorum ut validis fervescunt viribus undae. 


[The power of the disease spreading through one’s limbs drives the soul to 
distraction, like stormy winds lashing the waves of the troubled sea.] 

[A] While we are on this subject, Philosophy has armed Man well against all the 
other ills which may befall him, teaching him either to bear them or else, if the cost of 
that is too high, to inflict certain defeat on them by escaping from all sensation. But such 
methods can only be of service to a vigorous soul in control of herself, a soul capable of 
reason and decision: they are no use in a disaster such as this, where the soul of a 
philosopher becomes the soul of a madman, confused, lost and deranged. This can 


577 


happen from several causes: by some excessive emotion which snatches the mind away; 
by some strong passion engendered by the soul herself; by a wound in certain parts of 
the body; by a gastric vapour subjecting the soul to giddiness and confusion: 


[B] morbis in corporis, avius errat 
Saepe animus: dementit enim, deliraque fatur; 
Interdumque gravi lethargo fertur in altum 
Aeternumque soporem, oculis nutuque cadenti. 


[During physical illness, the soul often goes astray, becoming mad and talking 
deliriously; sometimes it plunges into a deep lethargy, into a perpetual sleep, as the eyes 
close and the head droops down.] 

[A] Philosophers, it seems to me, have hardly begun to pluck that particular chord; 
[C] no more than another one of similar importance. To console us in our mortal state 
they constantly present us with the following dilemma: the soul is either mortal or 
immortal; if mortal, she will be without pain; if immortal she will go on improving. But 
they never touch on the other alternative. What if she goes on getting worse! They 
simply hand threats of further punishment over to the poets. But that game is far too 
easy. 

I am often struck by these two omissions in their argument: I now go back to the 
first. [A] The deranged soul loses all taste for the Sovereign Good of the Stoics, so 
constant and so resolute. On this point our wisdom, fair though she is, really must 
surrender and lay down her arms. 

Meanwhile the vanity of human reason led philosophers to conclude that a 
composite being, linking in fellowship two elements as diverse as mortal body and 
immortal soul, is quite inconceivable. 


Quippe etenim mortale aeterno jungere, et una 
Consentire putare, et fungi mutua posse, 

Desipere est. Quid enim diversius esse putandum est, 
Aut magis inter se disjunctum discrepitansque, 

Quam mortale quod est, immortali atque perenni 
Junction, in concilio saevas tolerare procellas? 


[It is mad to think that the mortal is able to be joined to the eternal, to agree together 
and each to help the other. What can we possibly conceive more different, or, rather, 
more contrary and incompatible, than these two elements, one mortal, the other 
immortal and eternal, which you would join together to ride out the wildest storm?] 


578 



Moreover the soul, like the body, was thought to be involved in death, 


[B] Simul aevo fessa fatiscit. 
[She droops down, tired out with age.] 


[C] According to Zeno this is shown to us clearly by the image of sleep (which he 
thought was both the soul and the body dropping down in a faint): ‘Contrahi animum et 
quasi labi putat atque concidere’ [He conceived that the soul contracts, as it were, 
collapses and falls down in a swoon].— 

[A] It was recognized that the soul may sometimes retain her force and vigour to the 
end; that was explained by the different varieties of illness, just as some men retain one 
or other of their senses intact to the end - their hearing, say, or their sense of touch - 
nobody being so enfeebled as to have absolutely no part vigorous and whole. 


[B] Non alio pacto quam si, pes cum dolet aegri, 
In nullo caput interea sit forte dolore. 


[In the same way, a sick man’s feet may feel sharp pains, without his head feeling 
anything.]— 

Our mental insight is to Truth what an owl’s eyes are to the splendour of the sun. 
Aristotle says that. Is there any better way of convicting ourselves than by noting such 
total blindness in so clear a light? 

[A] Now for the contrary opinion: that the soul is in fact immortal. [C] Cicero says 
that, at least as far as books are concerned, it was first introduced by Pherecides of 
Scyros in the time of King Tullus. Some others attribute it to Thales, and there are other 
candidates.— [A] This branch of human learning is treated with the greatest reservation 
and doubt. On this matter, even the most confirmed Dogmatists are mainly constrained 
to shelter behind the shadowy teachings of Plato’s Academy. On this subject, nobody 
knows what Aristotle’s conclusions were, [C] no more than those of the Ancients in 
general, who handle the matter with a kind of vacillating belief: ‘rem gratissimam 
promittentium magis quam probantium ’ [a thing most pleasing, but more in promise than 
in proof].— [A] Aristotle hid behind a cloud of difficult and incomprehensible words 
and meanings, leaving his followers arguing as much about what he meant as about the 
matter itself. 

Two considerations made this opinion plausible to them: first, that without the 
immortality of the soul, fame would have no secure basis and so be hoped for in vain. 


579 


(By the standards of the world that is a consideration of wonderful importance.) The 
second is one of utility: it is useful that people should be convinced, [C] as Plato says, 
[A] that even when vices escape the dark and uncertain vigilance of human justice, they 
still remain exposed to that of divine Justice which will pursue them even after the 
death of the guilty.— [C] Man takes extreme care to prolong his being, providing for it 
by all possible means: he has tombs to preserve his body and fame to preserve his soul. 

Dissatisfied with his lot, Man has given free run to his opinions, building himself up 
into something else and propping himself up with his own ingenuity. The soul can never 
find a sure footing; she is too confused and weak for that. She roams about seeking 
bases for her hopes and consolations in conditions which are foreign to her nature. She 
clings to them and puts down roots. These notions which she ingeniously forges for 
herself may be ever so frivolous and fantastic, but she can find repose in them more 
surely than in herself, and much more willingly. [A] But it is a source of wonder that 
even those who are most obstinately attached to so just and clear a persuasion as 
spiritual immortality fall short, being powerless to establish it by their human ability. [C] 
One Ancient writer said, ‘Somnia sunt non docentis, sed optantis’ [They are not the 
dreams of one who demonstrates but of one who desires].— [A] From this evidence 
Man realizes that such truth as he does find out for himself is due to Fortune and to 
chance. Even when truth drops into his hands, Man has no means of seizing hold of it; 
his reason does not have power enough to establish any rights over it. Every single idea 
which results from our own reflections and our own faculties - whether it is true or false 
- is subject to dispute and uncertainty. In bygone days God produced the confusion and 
disorder of the Tower of Babel as a chastisement of our pride, to teach us our 
wretchedness and our inadequacy. Everything we undertake without God’s help, 
everything we try and see without the lamp of his grace, is vanity and madness. The 
essence of Truth is to be constant and uniform: when Fortune arranges for a little of it 
to come into our possession, out of weakness we corrupt it and debase it. Any course a 
man may adopt on his own is allowed by God to lead to this same confusion, the idea of 
which is so vividly portrayed in the just punishment which God visited upon the 
arrogance of Nembroth, bringing to nought his vain attempts to build that pyramidal 
Tower: [C] Ter dam sapientiam sapientium et prudentiam prudentium reprobabo’ [I will 
destroy the wisdom of the wise, and the understanding of the prudent I will reject]. [A] 
That diversifying of tongues and language by which God threw confusion over the 
enterprise of Babel, what else does it signify if not the infinite, endless altercation over 
discordant opinions and arguments which accompanies the vain structures of human 
knowledge, enmeshing them in confusion. [C] Usefully enmeshing them! If we actually 
possessed one grain of knowledge, there would be no holding us back. I like what that 


580 


Saint said: ‘Ipsa utilitatis occultatio, aut humilitatis exercitatio est, aut elationis attritio’ 
[Even that which is useful has been rendered obscure: that provides an occasion for 
exercising our humility and restraining our pride]. To what degree of arrogance and 
insolence do we not carry our blindness and our brutish stupidity.— 

[A] But to get back to our subject: it is truly reasonable that we should be beholden 
to God alone, to the benefit of his grace, for the truth of so excellent a belief: it is from 
God’s bountiful liberality that we receive the fruition of everlasting life, which is the 
enjoyment of eternal blessedness. 

[C] We should freely admit that God alone tells us this, and faith.— It is not a lesson 
we have been taught by Nature or Reason. Anyone who makes repeated examinations of 
himself, internally and externally, as a human being, with human powers but bereft of 
the divine privilege of grace; anyone who sees Man as he is, without flattery, will find 
no quality or faculty in Man which is not redolent of death and dust. The more we 
attribute, grant and refer to God, the more Christianly we act. Would the Stoic 
philosopher not be better advised to owe to God what he said he owed to the chance 
agreement of the Voice of the People? ‘Cum de animarum aeternitate disserimus, non 
leve momentum apud nos habet consensus hominum aut timentium inferos, aut colentium. 
Utor hac publica persuasione’ [When treating the immortality of the soul we attach no 
little weight to the general agreement among those who fear or worship the gods of the 
Underworld. I make good use of this general conviction].— 

[A] The feebleness of human reasoning on this subject is particularly noticeable 
from the fabulous details which men have added to it in their efforts to discover the 
characteristics of our future immortality. [C] We may leave aside the Stoics, who grant 
that souls do have a future life, but only a finite one: ‘usuram nobis largiuntur tanquam 
cornicibus: diu mansuros aiunt animos; semper, negant’ [They allow us to live as long as 
crows: our souls last a long time, they say, but not for ever].— 

[A] The most universally received opinion (which still subsists today in some places) 
was the one attributed to Pythagoras - (not that he was the first to hold it, but because 
his approval and authority gave great weight and credence to it); it was that our souls, 
when they depart from us, go the rounds from one body to another, from a lion, say, say, 
to a horse; from a horse, to a king, ceaselessly driven from one abode to another.— [C] 
Pythagoras said he distinctly remembered having previously been Aethalides, then 
Euphorbus, then Hermotimus and finally Pyrrhus, before his soul eventually passed into 
himself, with recollections covering two hundred and six years. 

Some added that these souls sometimes go back to heaven, and then come down 
again: 


581 


O pater, anne aliquas ad coelum hinc ire putandum est 
Sublimes animus iterumque ad tarda reverti 
Corpora? Quae lucis miseris tarn dir a cupido? 


[O Father, must we believe that some exalted souls go from here to heaven and then 
come back again to sluggish bodies? Why do those wretches still yearn for the light of 
day?]— 

Origen has souls everlastingly shuttling back and forth between wretchedness and 
bliss. Varro’s opinion relates how souls rejoin their original bodies after four hundred 
and forty years have rolled; for Chrysippus that happens after an undefined period.— 
Plato says that it was from Pindar and the old poets that he acquired his belief in the 
endless succession of changes by which the soul is purified (in the World to Come her 
rewards and punishments are temporary, since her life on earth is lived within time); he 
drew the conclusion that the soul must possess a detailed knowledge of the affairs of 
heaven, hell and earth (having sojourned in them during her many journeys to and fro): 
for her, It is a matter of recollection.— 

Elsewhere, the soul’s progression is like this: if a man has lived well he joins the star 
to which he is assigned; if badly, he becomes a woman; if even then he does not amend, 
he changes once more, this time into a beast with attributes appropriate to his vices; he 
will know no end to his punishments until he returns to his native condition, having rid 
himself, by force of reason, from all the gross, dull and material qualities within him.— 

[A] But I must not forget the objection raised by the Epicureans against this 
transmigration of souls from body to body. It is quite entertaining. They pose the 
question: What order could be maintained if the crowds of the dying proved greater 
than the number being born? The souls turned out of house and home would all be 
jostling each other, trying to be the first to get into their new containers! They also ask 
how souls would spend their time while waiting for their new lodgings to be got ready. 
The Epicureans maintain that if, at the other extreme, more animate creatures were 
bom than died, their bodies would be in a parlous state, having to wait for souls to be 
poured into them: some would die before they had started to live: 


Denique connubia ad veneris partusque ferarum 
Esse animus praesto deridiculum esse videtur, 

Et spectare immortales mortalia membra 
Innumero numero, certareque praeproperanter 
Inter se, quae prima potissimaque insinuetur. 


582 


[It seems absurd that souls should have to wait for the connubial embraces and 
parturitions of beasts - innumerable immortal beings looking out for mortal limbs and 
struggling among themselves to see who is strong enough to slip in first.]— 

Others make our souls remain in the body after death, so as to animate the snakes, 
worms and other creatures which are said to be produced by spontaneous generation in 
our rotting flesh or even from our ashes. Others split the soul into two parts, mortal and 
immortal. Others make it corporeal yet immortal. Others make it immortal, but without 
knowledge or awareness. There have been those who thought that the souls of the 
damned become devils [C] (and some of us Christians have thought that, too). [A] 
Similarly, Plutarch thinks that those who are saved become gods. There are few things 
that Plutarch asserts with more conviction (everywhere else his manner is one of 
sustained doubt and indecision). ‘We must think’, he says, ‘and firmly believe that the 
souls of men who have been virtuous by the standards of Nature and divine Justice, 
change from men into saints and from saints into demi-gods; finally these demi-gods 
become gods, once they are perfectly cleansed and purified (as in the sacrifices of 
purgation), and delivered in this way from death and passability. They do not become 
gods by some decree of the Senate but are gods in very truth, such as one could 
rationally expect them to be, full and perfect gods, to whom is granted a most blessed 
and most glorious apotheosis.’— Plutarch is the most reticent and most moderate of the 
whole bunch, but if you would like to see him indulging in some bolder skirmishing and 
spinning some miraculous yarns about all this, I refer you to his treatises On the Moon 
and On the Daemon of Socrates; there, more clearly than anywhere, you can confirm 
that the mysteries of philosophy have plenty of oddities in common with poetry; human 
understanding in its strivings to plumb the depths of everything and to give an account 
of it, destroys itself, just as we ourselves, tired and exhausted by life’s long race, fall 
back into childishness.— 

With that we come to the end of all the fine doctrines which we can distill from 
human science about our souls. 

There is no less rashness in what science tells us about our bodily parts. We had 
better choose one or two examples, otherwise we shall drown in the vast and troubled 
sea of medical error. We can at least find out whether there is any agreement over the 
material from which Man reproduces himself.— 

[C] As for the way Man was originally produced, that is a very deep and ancient 
problem: small wonder, then, that it leaves the human mind troubled and distraught. 
Archelaus the natural philosopher of whom Socrates was the disciple (and, according to 
Aristoxenus, the paramour) taught that men and animals were made of milky sludge, 


583 


exuded from the earth under the influence of heat. 

[A] Pythagoras said that our semen is the foam of our purest blood; Plato, a liquid 
draining from the marrow of the spinal column (supporting this with the argument that 
our backs are the first of our members to feel tired when we are on the job); Alcmeon 
says it is a part of the substance of the brain (proving this by the fact that men’s vision 
becomes troubled when they work immoderately at that particular exercise); for 
Democritus it is a substance extracted from the whole mass of the body; for Epicurus, a 
substance extracted from the soul as well as from the body; for Aristotle, the final 
excretion drawn from the nutriment of blood which spreads through all our limbs; for 
others it is concocted blood, digested by heat in the testicles - because extreme 
exertions can make us ejaculate drops of blood: there may be a little more probability 
here if, that is, any probability at all can be drawn from confusion so infinite. 

How does this semen achieve its purpose? Opinions are as numerous and as 
contradictory. Aristotle and Democritus hold that women have no semen, but only a 
kind of sweat which they exude when they bounce about in the heat of their enjoyment: 
it plays no role in generation. Galen, on the contrary, and those who follow him assert 
that generation can only occur when semen from male and female come into contact. 

And then, see how the doctors, philosophers and lawyers are all disputing and 
quarrelling with our women about how long a pregnancy can last! Personally I support, 
from my own case, those who assert that a pregnancy can last eleven months: the whole 
world is full of such experiences; any simple, uneducated woman could give advice on 
these disputed questions. And still we cannot reach agreement!— 

That suffices to demonstrate that Man has no more knowledge of his own body than 
of his own soul. We have shown Man to himself - and his reason to his reason, to see 
what it has to tell us. I have succeeded in showing, I think, how far reason is from 
understanding even itself. 

[C] And what can anyone understand who cannot understand himself? ‘Quasi vero 
mensuram ullius rei possit agere, qui sui nesciat' [As though one could measure anything 
and not know how to measure oneself].— Protagoras was really and truly having us on 
when he made Man the measure of all things - Man, who has never known even his 
own measurements. If Man cannot have it, then his dignity will not let any other 
creature have it: yet Man is so full of contradictions and his ideas are so constantly 
undermining each other that so favourable a proposition is simply laughable: it leads to 
the inevitable conclusion that both measure and the measurer are nothing.— 

When Thales reckons that a knowledge of Man is very hard to acquire, he is telling 


584 


him that knowledge of anything else is impossible.— 

For your sake, Patroness,— I have abandoned my usual practice and have taken 
some pains to make this into a very long chapter. Sebond is your author: you will, of 
course, continue to defend him with the usual forms of argument in which you are 
instructed every day; that will exercise your mind and your scholarship. The ultimate 
rapier-stroke which I am using here must only be employed as a remedy of last resort. It 
is a desperate act of dexterity, in which you must surrender your own arms to force your 
opponent to lose his. It is a covert blow which you should only use rarely and with 
discretion. It is rashness indeed to undo another by undoing yourself. [B] We must not 
seek to die as an act of revenge, as Gobrias did when locked in close combat with a 
Persian nobleman: Darius arrived on the scene, sword in hand, but was afraid to strike 
for fear of killing him; Gobrias shouted to him to strike boldly, even if he had to run 
both of them through.— 

[C] I have seen the proffered terms of a duel condemned in cases where the 
weapons or the circumstances left no room for hope that either of the combatants could 
survive. 


585 


The Portuguese took fourteen Turkish prisoners in the Indian Ocean, who, impatient 
of their captivity, decided to reduce themselves, their masters and the vessel to ashes; 
they succeeded in doing so by rubbing some of the ship’s nails together until a spark fell 
among the barrels of gunpowder which were there.— 

[A] Here we have now reached the limits and very boundaries of knowledge, where 
(as in the case of Virtue) extremes become vices. [Al] Keep to the beaten track: it can 
hardly be good to be so subtle and so clever. Remember the Tuscan proverb, Chi troppo 
s’assottiglia si scavezza ’ [He who becomes too clever is lost]. [A] My advice to you is to 
cling to moderation and temperance, as much in your opinions and arguments as in your 
conduct, fleeing what is merely new or odd. All roads which wander from the norm 
displease me. You, by the authority of your high rank as well as by virtue of qualities 
which are more strictly your own, can, with a glance, command anyone you please; you 
ought to have entrusted this task to a professional scholar, who would have been able to 
make a very different defence of these ideas and to have enriched them more 
effectively.— Nevertheless there is ample material here for what you have to do. 

When talking of Law, Epicurus said that even the harshest laws were necessary: 
without them men would start eating each other. [C] Plato is a mere finger’s breadth 
away from that; he says that, without laws, we would live like wild animals: and he 
makes a good assay at proving that true.— [A] Our minds are dangerous tools, rash and 
prone to go astray: it is hard to reconcile them with order and moderation. We have seen 
during my lifetime virtually all outstanding men, all men of abnormally lively 
perception, breaking out into licentiousness of opinion or behaviour. It is a miracle if 
you find one who is settled and civilized. We are right to erect the strictest possible 
fences around the human mind. In the march of scholarship or anything else the mind 
must needs have its footsteps counted and regulated; you must supply artificial hedges 
and make it hunt only within them. [Al] We rein it in, neck and throat, with religions, 
laws, customs, precepts, rewards and punishments (both mortal and immortal), and we 
still find it escaping from all these bonds, with its garrulousness and laxity. It is an 
empty vessel: we can neither grasp it nor aim it; it is bizarre and misshapen and suffers 
no knot and no grapple. 

[B] Certainly few souls are so powerful, so law-abiding and so well endowed that we 
can trust them to act on their own, allowing them liberty of judgement to sail 
responsibly and moderately beyond accepted opinion. It is more expedient to keep them 
under tutelage. What an outrageous sword [C] the mind is, even for its owner, [A] 
unless he knows how to arm himself ordinately and with discretion. [C] No beast more 
rightly needs blinkers to compel it to restrict its gaze to what lies before its feet, and to 


586 


stop it from wandering about, this way and that, outside the ruts which custom and law 
have trodden out for it. [A] That is why it would be better for you to keep closely to 
your usual ways, whatever they may be, rather than to fly off like this with such frantic 
licence. Nevertheless, if one of those newfangled ‘doctors’ comes into your presence and 
starts acting clever, putting your spiritual health at risk as well as his own, you can, in 
the last resort, call on this remedy as a prophylactic against the deadly plague which is 
daily spreading through your courts: it will stop that poisonous contagion from infecting 
you and those about you.— 

The freedom and vigour of minds in Antiquity created many Schools holding 
different opinions in philosophy and the humanities; before taking sides, each individual 
was responsible for judging and choosing for himself. But nowadays [C] men are all in 
step, ‘qui certis quibusdam destinatisque sententiis addicti et consecrati sunt, ut etiam quae 
non probant, cogantur defendere’ [bound by vows to certain definite opinions, so that 
they are forced to defend even those which have not won their assent];— [A] our studies 
are accepted according to the decrees of civil authority, [C] with the result that our 
Schools have only one model, all having the same circumscribed form of basic 
instruction and teaching; [A] we now no longer try and find out what weight and value 
such coins have: each of us in his turn accepts them at the going rate with the generally 
approved value. Nobody defends the alloy, only its currency. Every discipline becomes 
equally acceptable. Medicine is accepted as though it were as valid as geometry; 
jiggery-pokery, enchantments, magic spells producing impotence, communication with 
the spirits of the dead, prognostications, casting horoscopes and even that absurd hunt 
for the philosopher’s stone, all pass without contradiction. You merely have to know that 
the seat of Mars lies at the centre of the triangle of the palm, Venus in the thumbs and 
Mercury in your little finger; or know that, if the line of Fortune cuts across the 
protuberance of the forefinger, that is a sign of cruelty, but when it stops short at a point 
below the middle finger and the median line forming an angle with the line-of-life just 
below it, that is the sign of a pitiful death; in the case of a woman, if the line-of-nature 
is ‘open’ (not forming an angle with the line-of-life) that portends unchastity. Witness 
for yourself whether a mastery of this particular science does not win a man favour 
favour and respect in any company. 

Theophrastus said that the human intellect, guided by the senses, could go only so 
far towards understanding natural causes; but when it reaches the original first causes it 
proves blunt and has to stop, either because of its own weakness or else because of the 
difficulty of the subject.— 

That is a moderate and modest opinion which holds that our intellect is adequate 


587 


enough to bring us to the knowledge of some things but that there are definite limits to 
its power, beyond which it is rash to use it. 

It is a plausible opinion, set forth by conciliatory men (but it is difficult to fix 
boundaries for the human mind: it is avidly curious and sees no more reason for 
stopping after a mile than after fifty yards); it says: ‘The assays of experience have 
taught me that where one man fails another succeeds; that what is unknown to one 
century is clarified by the next; that the sciences and the arts are not just cast in a mould 
all at once, but have to be gradually shaped by repeated handling and polishing, just as 
the mother-bear takes time to lick her cub into shape; I may not be strong enough to 
uncover anything but I can still take soundings and make assays; by kneading and 
working the dough of this new subject-matter, by blending it and warming it through, I 
make it easier for my successor to enjoy it at leisure; I render it more pliable for him, 
more manageable. 


ut hymettia sole 

Cera remollescit, tractataque pollice, multas 
Vertitur in facies, ipsoque fit utilis usu. 


[As wax from Mt Hymettos can be softened in the sun and kneaded with the thumb 
to form various shapes, becoming more useful with usage.]— 

A second man will do the same for the third: that is why no difficulty should drive 
me to despair - nor should my own powerlessness, for it is merely my own; Man is 
capable of understanding everything as well as something.’ 

Yes; but if Man admits, like Theophrastus, that he has no knowledge of first causes 
and principles, then let him boldly give up all the rest of his knowledge; without 
foundations, his argument collapses; discussion and inquiry have only one aim: to 
establish first principles; if Man’s course is not stopped by his reaching that goal, he is 
thrown into boundless uncertainty. [C] ‘Non potest aliud alio magis minusve 
comprehendi, quoniam omnium rerum una est definitio comprehendedi’ [One thing 
cannot be better understood, or less understood, than another: ‘understanding’ anything 
always means the same].— 

[A] It is probable that if the soul knew anything, she would first know herself; then, 
if she knew anything outside herself, she would first of all know her bodily sheath. Yet 
we can see the gods of the medical schools still quarrelling over human anatomy: 


Mulciber in Trojam, pro Troja stabat Apollo. 
[Vulcan against Troy: Apollo for Troy.]— 


588 


Can we ever expect them to agree! We are closer to ourselves than to the whiteness 
of snow or the weight of a stone: if Man does not know himself, how can he know what 
his properties and powers are? Some true knowledge may perhaps find lodgings in us; if 
so, that is by chance, since error is received into the soul in the same way and in the 
same fashion; souls have no means of telling one from the other, no means of separating 
truth from falsehood. 

The Academic philosophers accepted that our balance of judgement may be swayed 
one way or the other; they found it too crude to say that it is no more likely that snow be 
white than black, or that we no more understand the movement of a stone thrown by our 
own hand than the movement of the Eighth Sphere. These are bizarre difficulties and 
our intellect can hardly find room for them (even though they had established that we 
are incapable of knowing anything and that Truth is swallowed up in deep abysses 
where Man’s vision cannot penetrate); to avoid them they admitted that some things are 
more likely than others and concede to judgement the power to incline towards one 
probability rather than another. They grant it this propensity, but they deny it 
conclusions. 

The Pyrrhonists’ idea is bolder, yet, at the same time, more true-seeming.— For 
what is this Platonic inclination, this propensity towards one proposition rather than 
another, than the recognition of there being more apparent truth in this than in that? But 
if our minds could grasp the form, lineaments, stance and face of Truth, then they 
would see whole truths as easily as partial truths, nascent and imperfect. Take that 
apparent verisimilitude which makes the scales incline to the left rather than to the right 
- then increase it; take that ounce of verisimilitude which turns the scales: multiply it a 
hundredfold or a thousandfold; in the end the balance will come down definitely on one 
side, deciding on one choice, on one whole truth. 

But how can they bring themselves to yield to verisimilitude if they cannot recognize 
verity? How can they know there to be a resemblance to something the essence of 
which they do not know? We judge entirely, or entirely not. If our intellectual faculties 
and our senses have no foundation to stand on but only float about in the wind, then it is 
pointless to allow our judgement to be influenced by their operation, no matter what 
‘probabilities’ it seems to present us with;— and so the surest position for our intellect to 
adopt, and the happiest, would be the one where it could remain still, straight, inflexible, 
without motion or disturbance. [C] ‘Inter visa vera aut falsa ad animi assensum nihil 
interest’ [Where the assent of the mind is concerned, there is no difference between true 
impressions and false ones].— 


589 


[A] Things do not lodge in us with their form and their essence; they do not come in 
by the force of their own authority: we can see that clearly; if they did, we would all 
react to them in the same way: wine would taste the same in the mouth of a sick man 
and a healthy one; a man whose hands were calloused or benumbed would find the same 
hardness in the timber or iron he was handling as anyone else. External objects therefore 
throw themselves on our mercy; we decide how we accept them.— 

Now, if we, for our part, could receive anything without changing it, if our human 
grasp were firm and capable of seizing hold of truth by our own means, then truth could 
be passed on from hand to hand, from person to person, since those means are common 
to all men. Among so many concepts we could find at least one which all would believe 
with universal assent. But the fact that there is no single proposition which is not subject 
to debate or controversy among us, or which cannot be so, proves that our natural 
judgement does not grasp very clearly even what it does grasp, since my judgement 
cannot bring a fellow-man’s judgement to accept it, which is a sure sign that I did not 
myself reach it by means of a natural power common to myself and to all men. 

Let us leave aside that infinite confusion of opinions which we can see among the 
philosophers themselves and that endless, world-wide debate about knowledge. It really 
is the truest of presuppositions that men - I mean the most learned, the best-endowed 
and the cleverest of men - never agree about anything, not even that the sky is above 
our heads. Those who doubt everything doubt that too. Those who deny that we can 
ever know anything say we cannot know whether the sky is above our heads or not. 
Those two opinions are by far the strongest, numerically. 

Apart from this infinite diversity and disagreement, we can easily see that the 
foundations of our powers of judgement are insecure from the worry it personally 
causes us and from the lack of certainty each man feels within himself. How our 
judgements vary! How frequently we change our ideas! What I hold and believe today, I 
hold and believe with the totality of my belief. All my faculties, all my resources hold 
tight to that opinion and vouch for it with all their might. It would be impossible for me 
to embrace and maintain any truth more strongly. I am wholly for it, truly for it. But - 
not once, not a hundred times, not a thousand times, but every day - have I not 
embraced something else with the same resources and under the same circumstances, 
only to be convinced later that it was wrong? At least we should acquire wisdom at our 
own expense! If this appearance has once deceived me, if my touchstone regularly 
proves unreliable and my scales wrong and out of true, why should I trust them this 
time, rather than all the others? Is it not stupid to let oneself be deceived so often by the 
same guide? Fortune may shift us five hundred times, may treat our powers of belief 


590 


like a pot to be endlessly emptied and filled with ever-differing opinions: nevertheless, 
the present one, the last one, is always sure and infallible! For this last one we must 
abandon goods, honour, life, health, everything. 


posterior res ilia reperta, 

Perdit, et immutat sensus ad pristina quaeque. 


[When we find something new, the recent destroys the older and makes us change 
our taste for it.]— 

[B] Whatever people preach to us and whatever we may learn from them, never 
forget that the giver is a man and so is the taker; a mortal hand presents it to us: a mortal 
hand takes it from him. Only such things as come to us from Heaven have the right and 
the authority to carry conviction; they alone bear the mark of Truth; but even they 
cannot be seen with our human eyes, nor do we obtain them by our own means: so great 
and so holy an Image could never dwell in so wretched a dwelling, unless God first 
makes it ready for that purpose, unless he forms it anew and fortifies it by his special 
grace and supernatural favour. 

[A] Our condition is subject to error: that ought, at very least, to lead us to be more 
moderate and restrained in making changes. We ought to admit that, no matter what we 
allow into our understanding, it often includes falsehoods which enter by means of the 
same tools which have often proved contradictory and misleading. 

It is not surprising that they should prove contradictory, since they are so easily 
biased and twisted by the lightest of occurrences. It is certain that our conceptions, our 
judgement and our mental faculties in general are all affected by the changes and 
alterations of the body. Those alterations are ceaseless. Are our minds not more alert, 
our memory more ready, our reasoning powers more lively when we are well rather than 
ill? Does not everything present a different aspect to our minds under the influence of 
joy and gaiety or of chagrin and melancholy? Do you think that the poems of Catullus 
or Sappho delight a miserable old miser as they do a vigorous and ardent youth? [B] 
Cleomenes the son of Anaxandridas being ill, his friends reproached him with having 
new and unaccustomed humours and ideas. ‘I am not surprised,’ he replied; ‘I am not the 
same person when I am well: being different, my opinions and ideas are different too.’— 

[A] There is a saying current in the legal chicanery of our law-courts applied to a 
criminal who comes before judges who happen to be in a good, gentle, generous mood: 
gaudeat de bona fortuna ‘Let him enjoy this good luck’: for it is certain that we sometimes 
come across minds whose judgement is prickly, sharp and poised to condemn and 


591 


which, at other times, are less difficult, more affable, more given to finding excuses. A 
judge may leave home suffering from the gout, jealous, or incensed by a thieving valet: 
his entire soul is coloured and drunk with anger: we cannot doubt that his judgement is 
biased towards wrath. [B] The august Senate of the Areopagus held their sessions at 
night, lest the sight of the plaintiff should influence their justice. [A] The very air and 
calm weather have power to change us - as that Greek poem says which Cicero cited: 


Tales sunt hominum mentes, quali pater ipse 
Juppiter auctifera lustravit lampade terras. 


[The minds of men are such as Father Jupiter wills them to be, as he bathes the earth 
in fruitful light.]— 

It is not only fevers, potions and great events which upset our judgement: the lightest 
thing can send it spinning. If a continual fever lays our minds prostrate, you can be sure 
that a three day fever will have a proportionately bad effect on them, even though we are 
not aware of it. If apoplexy can dim and totally snuff out our mental vision, you can be 
sure that even a cold will confuse it. Consequently, there can hardly be found a single 
hour in an entire lifetime when our powers of judgement are settled in their proper 
place; our bodies are subject to so many sustained changes and are composed of so 
many kinds of principles that there is always one pulling the wrong way -I trust the 
doctors over that! 

This malady, moreover, is not so easy to detect unless it is extreme and past all cure; 
Reason always hobbles, limps and walks askew, in falsehood as in truth, so that it is hard 
to detect when she is mistaken or unhinged. 

By reason I always mean that appearance of rationality which each of us constructs 
for himself - the kind of reason which can characteristically have a thousand contrary 
reactions to the same subject and is like a tool of malleable lead or wax: it can be 
stretched, bent or adapted to any size or to any bias; if you are clever, you can learn to 
mould it. 

Take a judge; however well-intentioned he may be, he must watch himself carefully 
(and not many people spend much time doing that), otherwise some inclination toward 
friend, relation, beauty or revenge (or even something far less weighty, such as that 
chance impulse which leads us to favour one thing rather than another, or which enables 
us to choose, without any sanction of reason, between two identical objects - or even 
some more shadowy cause, equally vain) will encourage some sneaking sympathy or 
hostility toward one of the parties to slip, unnoticed, into his judgement and tip the 


592 


balance. 

I spy closely on myself and keep my eyes constantly directed on myself alone - I do 
not have much else to do: 


quis sub Arcto 
Rex gelidae metuatur orae, 
Quid Tyridatem terreat, unice 
Securus 


[Quite indifferent to what ruler of the frozen North inspires great fear, or what 
dangers frighten Tiridates]— - 

yet even I hardly dare to tell of the vanity and the weakness which I find in myself. I 
have such wobbly legs, I am so unsteady on my feet, I totter about so and cannot even 
trust my eyesight, with the result that I feel quite a different person before and after a 
meal; when good health and a fine sunny day smile at me, I am quite debonair; give me 
an ingrowing toe-nail, and I am touchy, bad-tempered and unapproachable. [B] My 
horse’s gait seems sometimes rough, sometimes gentle; the very same road, now short, 
now much longer, and the same form of action more agreeable or less so. [A] Now, I 
am ready to do anything; later, ready to do nothing; what is nice now can be nasty later 
on. [Al] A thousand chance emotions, unbidden, are in turmoil within me; sometimes a 
melancholic humour gets hold of me; at others, a choleric one; sometimes grief or joy 
dominate me, for reasons of their own. [A] I pick up some books: I may have 
discovered outstanding beauties in a particular passage which really struck home: 
another time I happen upon the same passage and it remains an unknown, shapeless 
lump for me, however much I twist it, and pat it and bend it or turn it. [B] Even in the 
case of my own writings I cannot always recover the flavour of my original meaning; I 
do not know what I wanted to say and burn my fingers making corrections and giving it 
some new meaning for want of recovering the original one - which was better. I go 
backwards and forwards: my judgement does not always march straight ahead, but floats 
and bobs about, 


velut minuta magno 

Deprensa navis in mari vesaniente vento. 


[Like a tiny boat buffeted on the ocean by a raging tempest.]— 


593 


Many’s the time I have taken an opinion contrary to my own and (as I am fond of 
doing) tried defending it for the fun of the exercise: then, once my mind has really 
applied itself to that other side, I get so firmly attached to it that I forget why I held the 
first opinion and give it up. Almost any inclination, no matter which, takes me with it 
and carries me along by my own weight. Almost anybody could say much the same of 
himself if he watched himself [C] as I do. [B] Preachers know that the emotion which 
comes upon them as they speak moves them towards belief; and we know that when we 
are in a temper we devote ourselves to defending an assertion, impressing it upon 
ourselves and embracing it with furious approbation, far more than we ever do in cold? 
blooded calm. 

You give your lawyer a simple statement of your case; he replies, hesitantly, 
doubtfully: you feel that he is quite indifferent which side he is to defend. But if you 
offer him a good fee to get stuck into it and all worked up about it, does he not begin to 
take a real interest and, once his will is inflamed, do not his arguments and forensic 
skills become inflamed as well? A clear and indubitable truth comes and presents itself 
to his understanding. He finds that your case sheds quite a new light: he really believes 
in it and convinces himself accordingly. I even wonder whether ardour, born of despite 
and of obstinacy, when confronted by pressure from a magistrate or by violent threats - 
[C] (or even simply a concern for reputation) - [B] has not brought some men to be 
burned in defence of an opinion for which, when at liberty among friends, they would 
never even have burned their finger-tips. 

[A] The jolts and shocks which our soul receives from the passions of the body 
greatly affect her, but her own proper passions do so even more. They have such a hold 
on her that it could perhaps be maintained that her motions and propulsion come from 
her own tempests: without those agitations she would be becalmed like a ship on the 
open sea, abandoned by the helpful winds.— Anyone who did maintain that, [C] 
following the Peripatetics, [A] would do us little wrong, since it is recognized that most 
of the finer actions of the soul require - and can only arise from - such passionate 
impulses. It is said that valour cannot be achieved without the help of anger - 


[C] Semper Ajax fords, fortissimus tamen in furore 
[Ajax was always brave, but bravest when mad with fury]— - 


that we do not attack the wicked or our foes vigorously enough, unless we are angry; 
and that, to get justice out of judges, counsel must move them to anger. Strong desires 
motivated Themistocles; they motivated Demosthenes and forced philosophers to travel 
far and work late: and they lead us too towards useful ends: honour, learning, health. 


594 


In addition, our soul’s weakness when faced with pain and suffering serves to 
nurture repentance and remorse within our conscience and to feel the chastisements 
with which God scourges us as well as the chastisements of political punishment. [A] 
Compassion acts as a stimulus to [B] clemency; prudent self-preservation— [C] and 
self-control [B] are awakened by our fear; and how many fair actions are awakened by 
ambition? And how many by arrogance? [A] In short, not one eminent or dashing virtue 
can exist without some strong, unruly emotion. Was this one of the considerations which 
moved the Epicureans to relieve God of all care and concern for the affairs of men, 
since even the very actions of his goodness could not be directed towards us without 
disturbing his repose with passions - which are the goads and the incitements which 
drive the soul towards virtuous actions? [C] Or else did they think differently, taking the 
passions to be like storms, shamefully deflowering the soul of her tranquillity? ‘Ut mans 
tranquillitas intelligitur, nulla ne minima quidem aura fluctus commovente: sic animi 
quietus et placatus status cernitur, quum perturbatio nulla est qua moveri queat’ [We 
know the sea is tranquil when not even the slightest breath of wind ruffles the surface; 
so too the soul is calm and at peace when there is no emotion seeking to disturb it].— 

[A] What varied thoughts and reasons, what conflicting notions, are presented to us 
by our varied passions! What certainty can we find in something so changeable and 
unstable as the soul, subject by her condition to the dominance of perturbations, [C] and 
who never moves except under external constraint. [A] If our judgement is in the hands 
of illness itself and of turbulence; if it is obliged to receive its impressions from 
foolhardiness and madness: what certainty can we expect from it? 

[C] Is it not somewhat bold of Philosophy to think that men perform their greatest 
deeds, those nearest to the divine, when they are beside themselves, frenzied and out of 
their senses? Our amendment comes when our reason slumbers or when we are deprived 
of it; the two natural ways of entering into the council chamber of the gods and to have 
foreknowledge of Destiny are sleep and frenzy.— 

Here is a pleasant thought: when the passions bring dislocation to our reason, we 
become virtuous; when reason is driven out by frenzy or by sleep, that image of death, 
we become prophets and seers. I have never been more inclined to believe Philosophy! 
It was a pure enthusiasm - breathed into the spirit of Philosophy by holy Truth herself - 
which wrenched from her, against her normal teaching, that the tranquil state of our 
soul, the quiet state, the sanest state that Philosophy can obtain for her, is not her best 
state. Our waking sleeps more than our sleeping; our wisdom is less wise than our folly; 
our dreams are worth more than our discourse; and to remain inside ourselves is to 
adopt the worst place of all. 


595 


But does Philosophy not realize that we are clever enough to notice that that maxim 
which makes the spirit so great, so perfect, and so clear-sighted when detached from 
Man, and yet so dark, so ignorant and so earthy when it remains in Man, is produced by 
the very spirit which itself forms part of dark, ignorant and earthy Man. And so, for that 
very cause, is neither to be trusted nor believed?— 

[A] Being of a soft and heavy complexion, I do not have much experience of those 
disturbances which bear the mind away and which mostly take our souls by surprise 
without giving them time to know themselves. But there is a passion in the heart of the 
young (induced, they say, by idleness); those who have assayed resisting its power, even 
when it takes an untrammelled, moderate course, find that it gives a good idea of the 
abrupt changes and deteriorations which our judgement can suffer. There was a time 
when I tensed myself to resist and parry its assaults (for I am so far from being one who 
welcomes vices, that I never give in to them unless they compel me to); despite my 
resistance, I would feel it within me as it was born, and as it grew and developed; I was 
lively: my eyes were open. Yet it would seize me, possess me. It was like a kind of 
drunkenness; everything took on an unaccustomed appearance; I would see the woman I 
yearned for becoming manifestly more attractive, her qualities swelling and growing as 
the wind of my imagination blew upon them; the difficulties facing my courtship would 
seem to become easy and smooth; my reason and conscience would withdraw into the 
background. Then, with lightning speed, at the very instant when my fire had burned 
itself out, my soul would recover another state, another judgement, another way of 
looking at things; it was now the difficulties of getting out of it which seemed immense 
and insurmountable; the very same things took on very different tastes and appearances 
from the ones offered me by inflamed desire. 

Which was right? Pyrrho knows nothing about that! 

We are never free from illness: fevers blow hot and cold; we drop straight from 
symptoms of a burning passion into symptoms of a shivery one. [B] The more I jumped 
forward, the more I now leap back: 


Qucilis ubi alterno procurrens gurgite pontus 
Nunc ruit ad terras, scopulisque superjacit undam, 
Spumeus, extremamque sinu perfundit arenam; 
Nunc rapidus retro atque aestu revoluta resorbens 
Saxa fugit, littusque vado labente relinquit. 


[Thus does the sea with alternate tides now dash up the beach, covering the rocks 
with its foaming billows, and seeking out the deep recesses of the sand; and then it 


596 


quickly turns, sucking back the shingle and fleeing the rocks, as its sinking waters 
relinquish the beach.]— 

[A] This very awareness of my mutability has had the secondary effect of 
engendering a certain constancy in my opinions. I have hardly changed any of my first 
and natural ones, since whatever likelihood novelty may appear to have, I do not change 
easily, for fear of losing in the exchange. As I do not have the capacity for making a 
choice myself, I accept Another’s choice and remain where God put me. Otherwise I 
would not know how to save myself from endlessly rolling. 

[AI] And thus, by God’s grace, without worry or a troubled conscience, I have kept 
myself whole, within the ancient beliefs of our religion, through all the sects and 
schisms that our century has produced. [A] The writings of the Ancients - I mean the 
good, ample, solid ones - tempt me and stir me almost at will; the one I am reading 
always seems the most firm. All appear right in their turn, even though they do 
contradict each other. The ease with which good minds can make anything they wish 
seem likely, so that there is nothing so strange but that they will set about lending it 
enough colour to take in a simple man like me, shows how weak their proofs really are. 
For three thousand years the skies and the stars were all in motion; everyone believed it; 
then [C] Cleanthes of Samos or, according to Theophrastus, Nicetas of Syracuse [A] 
decided to maintain that it was the Earth which did the moving,— [C] revolving on its 
axis through the oblique circle of the Zodiac; [A] and in our own time Copernicus has 
given such a good basis to this doctrine that he can legitimately draw all the right 
astronomical inferences from it. What lesson are we to learn from that, except not to 
worry about which of the two opinions may be true? For all we know, in a thousand 
years’ time another opinion will overthrow them both.— 


Sic volvenda aetas conmmutat tempora rerum: 
Quod fuit in pretio, fit nullo denique honore; 

Porro aliud succedit, et e contemptibus exit, 

Inque dies magis appetitur, floretque repertum 
Laudibus, et miro est mortales inter honore. 


[Thus the rolling years give various things their time; what used to be highly 
esteemed is now worthless; something else comes out from discredit and succeeds the 
old; it is daily sought for; everyone praises it and it is wondrously honoured among 
mortal men.]— 

Thus, whenever some new doctrine is offered to us we have good cause for 
distrusting it and for reflecting that the contrary was in fashion before that was 


597 


produced; it was overturned by this later one, but some third discovery may overturn 
that too, one day. Before the principles which Aristotle introduced came into repute, 
other principles satisfied human reason just as his satisfy us now. What letters-patent do 
Aristotle’s principles have, what exclusive privilege, that the course of our inquiries 
should stop with them and that they have the right to our assent for all time? They are 
not exempt: they can be kicked out as their predecessors were. When some new 
argument presses me hard, it is up to me to decide whether someone else may find a 
satisfactory reply even if I cannot; for to believe everything that may look true just 
because we ourselves cannot refute it, is very simple-minded. From that it would follow 
that the belief of the common people - [C] and all of us are common people - [A] 
would blow about like a weathercock: for their minds, soft and non-resistant, would 
constantly be forced to accept different impressions, each one effacing the trace of the 
other. Anyone who feels too weak to resist should follow legal practice and reply that he 
will consult counsel - or refer to the wiser heads who trained him. 

How long has medicine been in the world? They say that some newcomer called 
Paracelsus is changing or reversing the entire order of the old rules, maintaining that, up 
to the present, medicine has merely served to kill people. He will be able to prove that 
easily enough, I believe, but it would not be very wise for me, I think, to test his new 
empiricism at the risk of my life. [AI] ‘Believe nobody,’ as the saying goes. ‘Anyone can 
say anything.’— 

One of those men who champion novelties and reformations in natural science told 
me recently that all the Ancients had evidently been wrong about the nature and 
movements of the winds; if I would only listen he would make me clearly see the 
palpable truth. After showing some patience in hearing his arguments (which looked 
extremely probable) I said, ‘What! Those who were navigating according to the rules of 
Theophrastus, were they really going West when steering East? Were they sailing 
sideways or astern?’ - ‘That is as may be,’ he replied, ‘but they certainly got it wrong.’ I 
then retorted that I would rather be guided by results than by reason - for they are 
always clashing! I have even been told that in geometry (which claims to have reached 
the highest degree of certainty among the sciences) there are irrefutable demonstrations 
which overturn truth based on experience. Jacques Peletier, for example, in my own 
home, told me how he had discovered two lines drawing ever closer together but which, 
as he could prove, would meet only in infinity.— And the sole use Pyrrhonists have for 
their arguments and their reason is to undermine whatever experience shows to be 
probable; it is wonderful how far our supple reason will go along with their project of 
denying factual evidence: they can prove that we do not move, that we do not speak and 
that there is no such thing as weight or heat, with the same force of argument as we have 


598 


when we prove the most likely things to be true. 

Ptolemy was a great figure; he established the boundaries of the known world; all 
the ancient philosophers thought they had the measure of it, save for a few remote 
islands which might have escaped their knowledge. A thousand years ago, if you had 
questioned the data of cosmography, you would have been accused of Pyrrhonizing - of 
doubting opinions accepted by everybody; [B] it used to be heresy to allow the existence 
of the Antipodes!— [A] But now that in our century new discoveries have revealed, not 
the odd island or the odd individual country, but an infinite land-mass, almost equal in 
size to the part we already knew, geographers today proceed to assure us that everything 
has really been seen and discovered this time. 


Nam quod adest praesto, placet, el pollere videtur. 

[For we are pleased with what is to hand; it works its spell.] 

Since Ptolemy was once mistaken over his basic tenets, would it not be foolish to 
trust what modems are saying now?— [C] Is it not more likely that this huge body 
which we call the Universe is very different from what we think? Plato holds that its 
entire aspect changes - that there comes a point when the heavens, the stars and the sun 
reverse the motions which we can see there and actually rotate from East to West.— 
The Egyptian priests told Herodotus that since the time of their first king, some eleven 
thousand years ago - (and they showed him the statues of all these kings, portrayed 
from life) - the Sun had changed its course four times, and the sea and land had 
changed places. They also said that no date within time can be ascribed to the origin of 
the world;— Aristotle and Cicero agree with that; and one of our own people 
maintained that the world exists from all eternity but has a cycle of deaths and rebirths; 
he cited Solomon and Isaiah as witnesses, his aim being to counter objections to God’s 
having been a Creator who had once never created anything, an idle God who only cast 
aside his idleness when he set his hand to this enterprise and therefore a God subject to 
change.— 

In the most famous of the Greek Schools of Philosophy the Universe is considered 
to be a god made by a greater one; it is composed of a body, with a soul situated in the 
centre but extending to the circumference by means of musical Numbers; it is divine, 
most blessed, most great, most wise and eternal. Within this ‘god’ there are other gods 
(the earth, the sea, the heavenly bodies) all maintained by the harmonious and perpetual 
movement of a sacred dance as they draw together then draw apart, hide then reveal 
themselves, or move to and fro and change their rows.— 


599 


Heraclitus laid down that the Universe was composed of fire and was destined one 
day to burst into flames and bum itself out: it would be bom again some other time. 
Apuleius said that Men were ‘sigillatim mortales, cunctim perpetui’ [individually mortal, 
collectively eternal]. Alexander gave his mother the written record which one of the 
Egyptian priests had taken from their monuments; it bore witness to the boundless 
antiquity of that people and included a true account of the birth and growth of other 
countries. Cicero and Diodorus say that, in their own days, the Chaldaeans kept records 
going back some four hundred thousand years; Aristotle, Pliny and others date 
Zoroaster six thousand years before the time of Plato. 

Plato says that the citizens of Sais possess written records covering eight thousand 
years, adding that the city of Athens was built a thousand years before the foundation of 
that city.— 

[B] Epicurus taught that there exist in several other worlds objects very like the ones 
we can see here, fashioned the same way.— He would have said that with even greater 
assurance if he could have seen those strange examples of past and present similarities 
and resemblances to be found between our world and that New World of the West 
Indies. 

[C] In truth, when I consider what we know about the course of social life on this 
earth, I have often been struck with wonder at the resemblances there are - separated by 
immense spaces of place and time - between many savage beliefs or fantastic popular 
opinions which, whatever way you look at them, do not seem to arise from our natural 
reasoning. The human mind is a great forger of miracles, we know that: but this 
relationship has something abnormal about it which I cannot define; you can even see it 
in names, events and thousands of other ways. [B] For we have newly discovered 
peoples who, as far as we know, have never heard of us, yet where they believe in 
circumcision; where countries or great states are entirely governed by women, without 
men; where you can find something like our Lenten fasts, with the addition of sexual 
abstinence. We have found peoples where our crosses are honoured in various ways (in 
one place they even displayed them prominently on their graves); in another crosses 
were used (especially the cross of St Andrew) to ward off nocturnal visions; they also 
put them on their children’s beds against enchantments. Elsewhere was discovered a 
wooden cross, immensely tall, which was worshipped as the god of rain - and that was 
very far from the coast. Also found there were the express image of our penitents, the 
use of mitres, the practice of priestly celibacy, the art of divination from the entrails of 
sacrificed animals, [C] a total abstention from all kinds of fish and flesh, [B] the custom 
for priests to make liturgical use of a special tongue not the common one; the idea that 


the first god was driven away by a second, his younger brother; the belief that they were 
created with all kinds of advantages which were subsequently cut off because of their 
sin; their land changed and their natural condition made harsher; they were submerged 
by a heaven-sent flood, only a few families being saved who had taken refuge in high 
mountain caves, which they blocked up to stop the waters getting in; various species of 
animals were shut in there too; when they thought the rain had ceased, dogs were sent 
out: they came back dripping wet and clean, so it was judged that the waters had only 
begun to subside; later other dogs were sent out. When they returned all covered in mud 
the humans emerged to re-people the world, which they found to be full of nothing but 
snakes. 

In one case the inhabitants were convinced of a Day of Judgement. When the 
Spaniards scattered the bones of their dead about as they plundered their graves in 
search of treasure, they were beside themselves with anger, declaring that such scattered 
bones could not easily be put together again. They have trade by barter (but no other) 
with fairs and markets for this purpose; they have dwarves and deformed people to 
enliven the banquets of their princes; falconry they have, but with their own native birds; 
they have tyrannous taxation, elegant gardens, acrobats, dancing, musical instruments, 
coats-of-arms, tennis-courts, games of dice and chance - at which they get so carried 
away that they stake themselves and their freedom; they have medicine based entirely on 
magic charms, pictorial writing, a belief in one first man who was father of all peoples; 
they have the worship of a god who once lived as a Man in perfect celibacy, abstinence 
and penitence, preaching the law of Nature and liturgical ceremonies and who 
disappeared from the world without a natural death; a belief in giants, the custom of 
getting drunk on their local drink and seeing who can down the most, religious 
ornaments painted with bones and death’s heads, surplices, holy water and aspergilla, 
women and servants who gaily volunteer to be burnt or buried alive with their husband 
or masters, laws of inheritance which leave everything to the eldest son and set nothing 
but obedience aside for the younger one, the custom that a man promoted to high rank 
adopts a new name and abandons his old one, the custom of sprinkling chalk on the 
knee of a newborn babe, saying to him: ‘Dust thou art, and to dust thou shalt return’; 
and they have the art of augury. 

Such vain shadows of our religion as may be seen in some of these examples witness 
to its dignity and holiness: it has penetrated into infidel nations on our side of the world 
by a kind of imitation, but to those natives of far-off lands it came by a shared 
supernatural inspiration. For we found a belief in Purgatory but of a difference style: 
they attribute to cold what we attribute to heat, thinking that the souls of the dead are 
punished and purged by the rigours of extreme cold. 


601 



That reminds me of another pleasing example of diversity: some peoples like to 
uncover the end of the penis, circumcizing the foreskin like Jews or Moslems, whereas 
others have such conscientious objections to ever uncovering it that, lest the top of it 
should ever see the light of day, they scrupulously stretch the foreskin right over it and 
tie it together with little cords. 

And here is another one: just as we honour kings and festive days by putting on our 
best clothes, there are regions where they emphasize the disparity between themselves 
and their king and mark their total submission to him by appearing in their shabbiest 
clothing; as they go into the palace they put a tattered robe over their good one, so that 
all pomp and glory should belong to the king alone.— 

But to get on. 

[AI] If Nature includes among her normal activities - along with everything else - 
the beliefs, judgements and opinions of men; and if such things have their cycles, 
seasons, births and deaths, every bit as much as cabbages do, the heavens changing them 
and influencing them at will: what permanent, magisterial authority should we go on 
attributing to them?— 

[B] Now if experience makes it clear that the very form of our being - not only our 
colour, build, complexion and behaviour but our mental faculties as well - depends upon 
our native air, climate and soil ([C] as Vegetius said: ‘et plaga coeli non solum ad robur 
corporum, sed etiam animorum facif [the heavenly regions contribute not only to the 
strength of men’s bodies but of their souls as well]); m and if the goddess who founded 
Athens chose for her city a country of temperate climate which made men wise - that is 
what the priests of Egypt told Solon: ‘Athenis tenue coelum, ex quo etiam acutiores 
putantur Attici; crassum Thebis, itaque pingues Thebani et valentes’ [the air of Athens is 
not oppressive, which is why the Athenians are considered most intelligent; that of 
Thebes is oppressive, therefore the Thebans are considered heavy and tough]— - [B] 
then men must vary as flora and fauna do: whether they are more warlike, just, equable, 
clever or dull, depends on where they were born. Here they are addicted to wine: there, 
to robbery and lechery; here they are inclined towards superstition: there to disbelief; 
[C] here, to freedom: there, to slavery; [B] they may be more suited to leam one 
particular art of science than another; they may be slow or intelligent, obedient or 
rebellious, good or bad, all depending on inclinations arising from their physical 
environment. Change their location, and, like trees, they take on a new character. That 
was why Cyrus refused to allow the Persians to give up their squat and rugged land and 
emigrate to softer plains; [C] he said that rich soft lands make for soft men, that fertile 
lands make for barren minds.— [B] Now, if we can see that the influence of the stars 


602 


makes an art or an opinion to flourish; and if a particular age produces a particular kind 
of nature and inclines the human race towards some particular trait of character (their 
spirits producing good crops then lean crops, as fields do): what happens to all those 
special privileges which we pride ourselves upon? A wise man can be mistaken; a 
hundred men can; indeed, according to us, the whole human race has gone wrong for 
centuries at a time over this or that: so how can we be sure that human nature ever stops 
getting things wrong, [C] and that she is not wrong now, in our own period? 

[A] Among other considerations witnessing to Man’s weakness, it seems to me that 
we should not overlook that even his desires cannot lead him to discover what he needs; 
I am not talking about fruition, but about thinking and wishing: we cannot even agree on 
what we need to make us contented. Even if we let our thoughts tailor everything to 
their wishes, they cannot even desire what is proper to them [C] and so be satisfied: 


[B] quid enim ratione timemus 
Aut cupimus? quid tarn dextro pede concipis, ut te 
Conatus non poeniteat votique peracti? 


[Is it reason that governs our fears and our desires? What have you ever conceived, 
even auspiciously, without being sorry about the outcome - even of its success?]— 

[A] That is why [C] Socrates prayed the gods to give him only what they knew to be 
good for him. The Spartans, in public as in private, simply prayed that good and 
beauteous gifts be vouchsafed to them; they left the choice and selection to the gods:— 


[B] Conjugium petimus partumque uxoris; at illi 
Notum qui pueri qualisque futura sit uxor. 


[We pray to have a wife and children, yet only Jupiter knows what the children and 
that wife will be like.]— 

[A] In his supplications the Christian says, ‘Thy will be done’, in order not to suffer 
that unseemly state which poets feign for King Midas: he prayed to God that all he 
touched should turn to gold. His prayer was granted: his wine was gold, his bread was 
gold, so were the very feathers in his bed, his undershirt and all his garments. In this 
way he found that the enjoyment of his desires crushed him and that he had been 
granted a boon no man could bear. He had to unpray his prayers: 


Attonitus novitate mali, divesque miserque, 
Effugere optat opes, et quae modo voverat, odit. 


603 


[Thunderstruck by so new an evil, rich and wretched both at once, he hates what 
once he prayed for.]— 

[B] I can cite my own case. When I was young I begged Fortune, as much as 
anything, for the Order of St Michael: it was then the highest mark of honour for the 
French nobility, and very rare. Fortune granted it to me, but with a smirk instead of 
elevating me, instead of lifting me up so that I could reach it, she used greater 
condescension: she debased the Order, and brought it right down to my neck - lower 
still in fact. 

[C] Cleobis and Bito asked their god, Trophonius and Agamedes their goddess, for 
rewards worthy of their piety; the gift they were given was death: so different from ours, 
where our needs are concerned, are the opinions of heaven.— 

[A] It is sometimes to our detriment that God vouchsafes us riches, honour, life and 
health itself: the things which please us are not always good for us. If, instead of a cure, 
he sends us death or a worsening of our ills - ‘Virga tua et baculus tuus ipsa me 
consolata sunt’ [Even thy rod and thy staff do comfort me] - God acts thus by reason of 
his Providence, which knows our deserts far more accurately than we can ever do; 
whatever comes from a hand most loving and omniscient we must accept as good: 


si consilium vis 

Permittes ipsis expendere numinibus, quid 
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris: 
Charior est illis homo quam sibi. 


[If you want my advice, allow the gods to judge what is best for us and most 
advantageous for our affairs; a man is dearer to them than he is to himself.]— 

For to ask the gods for honour and high office is like begging them to send you into 
battle, into a game of dice or into some other situation where the outcome is unknown 
and the gain dubious.— 

[A] No quarrel among philosophers is more violent or so bitter as the one which 
looms over the question of Man’s sovereign good; [C] according to Varro’s calculation, 
288 sects were produced by it:— ‘Qui autem de summo bono dissentit, de tota 
philosophiae ratione dissentit’ [Whoever disagrees over the sovereign good disagrees 
about the whole of philosophy].— 


[A] Tres mihi convivae prope dissentire videntur, 
Poscentes vario multum diversa palato: 


604 


Quid dem? quid non dem? Renuis tu quod jubet alter; 
Quod petis, id sane est invisum acidumque duobus. 


[For me it resembles three men disagreeing at a feast, each liking very different 
dishes and asking for them. What am I to give them? What am I not to give them? You 
reject what delights another: what you like is tart and unpleasant to the other two.]— 

That is the way Nature ought to answer their disputes and their quarrels. 

There are those who say that our good is to be found in virtue; some who say in 
pleasure; some, in conforming to Nature; one says in knowledge [C] or freedom from 
pain;— [A] another, in not letting oneself be deceived by appearances, a notion rather 
like that other one [B] taught by Pythagoras of old: 


[A] Nil admirari prope res est una, Numaci, 
Solaque quae possit facere et servare beatum; 


[Be astonished by nothing; it is almost the one and only way, Numacius, which leads 
to lasting happiness;]— 

that is the aim of the Pyrrhonists. [C] (To be astonished by nothing is, for Aristotle, 
the attribute of greatness of soul.)— [A] Archesilaus said that suspending the judgement 
and keeping it upright and inflexible are good actions, whereas acts of consent and 
commitment are vicious and bad. It is true that he left his Pyrrhonism behind when he 
erected that axiom into a certainty!— Pyrrhonists say that the sovereign good is 
Ataraxia, which consists in a total immobility of judgement; they consider that not to be 
a positive affirmation but simply an inner persuasion such as makes them avoid 
precipices and protect themselves from the chill of the evening; it presents them with 
this notion and makes them reject any other. 

[B] How I wish that, during my lifetime, someone like Justus Lipsius (the most 
learned man left, a polished and judicious mind, a veritable brother to my dear 
Turnebus), had the health, the will and sufficient leisure to compile an honest and 
careful account which listed by class and by category everything we can find out about 
the opinions of Ancient philosophy on the subject of our being and our morals; it would 
include their controversies and their reputations, it would tell us who belonged to which 
school, and how far the founders and their followers actually applied their precepts on 
memorable occasions which could serve as examples. What a beautiful and useful book 
that would be!— 

[A] Moreover, if we draw our moral rules from ourselves, what confusion we cast 


605 


ourselves into! For the most convincing advice we get from reason is that each and every 
man should obey the laws of his own country;— [C] that is Socrates’ precept, inspired 
(he said) by divine counsel.— [A] But what does that mean, except that our rules of 
conduct are based on chance? Truth must present the same face everywhere. If Man 
could know solid Rectitude and Justice in their true Essences, he would never restrict 
them to the customary circumstances of this place or of that; Virtue would not be 
fashioned from whatever notions happen to be current in Persia or in India. 

Nothing keeps changing so continuously as the Law. Since I was born I have seen 
our neighbours, the English, chopping and changing theirs three or four times, not only 
on political matters (where we may wish to do without constancy) but on the most 
important subject there ever can be: religion.— It makes me feel sad and ashamed, since 
the English are a people with whom we used to be so familiarly acquainted in my part 
of the world that traces of their former kinship can still be seen in my own house. 

[C] And closer to home, I have seen capital offences made lawful; such are the 
uncertainties and the fortunes of war that any one of us may eventually be found guilty 
of lese-majeste against God and the King, simply for holding fast to different ideas of 
legitimacy, once our Justice were to fall to the mercy of Injustice (which, after a few 
years of possession, would change its essence).— Could that ancient god have more 
clearly emphasized the place of ignorance within our human knowledge of the divine 
Being, or taught us that religion is really no more than a human invention, useful for 
binding societies together, than by telling those who came before his Tripod to beg for 
instruction that the true way of worship is the one hallowed by custom in each locality? 

393 

Oh God, how bound we are to the loving-kindness of our sovereign Creator for 
making our belief grow up out of the stupidities of such arbitrary and wandering 
devotions, establishing it on the changeless foundation of his holy Word!— 

[A] But what has Philosophy to teach us in this plight? Why, that we should follow 
the laws of our country! - laws which are but an uncertain sea of opinions deriving from 
peoples or princes, who will paint it in as many different colours and present it, 
reformed, under as many different faces as they have changes of heart. I cannot make 
my judgement as flexible as that. What kind of Good can it be, which was honoured 
yesterday but not today [C] and which becomes a crime when you cross a river! What 
kind of truth can be limited by a range of mountains, becoming a lie for the world on 
the other side!— 

[A] Philosophers can hardly be serious when they try to introduce certainty into 
Law by asserting that there are so-called Natural Laws, perpetual and immutable, whose 


606 


essential characteristic consists in their being imprinted upon the human race. There are 
said to be three such laws; or four; some say less, some say more: a sign that the mark 
they bear is as dubious as all the rest. How unlucky they are - (for what else should I 
call it but bad luck, seeing that out of laws so infinite in number, they cannot find even 
one which luck [C] or accidental chance [A] has allowed to be universally accepted by 
the agreement of all peoples). They are so pitiful that there is not one of these three - or 
four - selected laws, which has not been denied and disowned by several nations, not 
just one. Yet universal approval is the only convincing indication they can cite in favour 
of there being any Natural Laws at all. For whatever Nature truly ordained, we would, 
without any doubt, all perform, by common consent: not only all nations but all human 
beings individually would be deeply aware of force or compulsion when anyone tried to 
make them violate it. Let them show me just one law with such characteristics: a would 
like to see it.— 

Protagoras and Ariston said that the essential justice of any law consists in the will 
of the lawgiver: without it, good and honourable lose their qualities, simply lingering on 
as empty words for things indifferent. 

In Plato, Thrasymachus thinks that there is no right other than the advantage of the 
superior.— 

Nothing in all the world has greater variety than law and custom. What is 
abominable in one place is laudable somewhere else - as clever theft was in Sparta. 
Marriages between close relations are capital offences with us: elsewhere they are much 
honoured: 


gentes esse feruntnr 

In quibus et nato genitrix, et nata parenti 
Fungitur, et pietas geminato crescit amore. 


[They say there are peoples where the son lies with his mother, the daughter with her 
father, where family piety is enhanced by a double affection.]— 

Murdering children, murdering fathers, holding wives in common, making a business 
out of robbery, giving free rein to lusts of all sorts - in short there is nothing so extreme 
that it has not been admitted by the custom of some nation or other. 

[B] It is quite believable that natural laws exist: we can see that in other creatures. 
But we have lost them; that fine human reason of ours is always interfering, seeking 
dominance and mastery, distorting and confounding the face of everything according to 
its own vanity and inconsistency. [C] ‘Nihil itaque amplius nostrum est: quod nostrum 


607 


dico, artis est’ [Nothing of ours is left: what I call ours is really artificial].— 

[A] Any object can be seen in various lights and from various points of view: it is 
chiefly that which gives birth to variety of opinion: one nation sees one facet, and stops 
there; another sees another. 

Nothing can be imagined more horrible than eating one’s father: yet the peoples who 
followed this custom in the Ancient world looked on it as a mark of piety and love, 
seeking to provide their ancestors with the most worthy and honourable of obsequies, 
finding a home for their father’s remains in their own person, in the very marrow of 
their bones; they were giving them a kind of new life; they were born again, as it were, 
by being transmuted into their living flesh as their children ate and digested them. It is 
easy to think what abominable cruelty it would be for men deeply imbued in such a 
superstition to leave their parents’ remains to rot in the earth, food for beasts and 
worms.— 

The aspects of theft which struck Lycurgus were the quickness, the industry, the 
boldness and the skill necessary to steal something from a neighbour, as well as of the 
public good which came from each man carefully guarding his own property. He 
believed that this gave a grounding in the twin subjects of assault and defence, both of 
which are useful for training soldiers (the principal virtue and science which he wished 
to instil into that nation). That outweighed the disorder and injustice of carrying off 
other people’s property. 

The tyrant Dionysius offered Plato a long, perfumed, damask robe, fashionable in 
Persia. Plato refused it saying that, since he was born a man, he would not willingly 
wear women’s clothing. Aristippus, however, accepted it, replying that no apparel could 
corrupt a chaste heart;— and [C] when his friends taunted him with cowardice for 
taking so little offence when Dionysius spat in his face, he replied: ‘Merely to catch a 
gudgeon fishermen suffer the waves to bespatter them from head to foot.’ Diogenes was 
washing some cabbage leaves when he saw Aristippus go by: ‘If you knew how to live on 
cabbage,’ Diogenes said, ‘you would not be courting a tyrant.’ Aristippus retorted: ‘You 
would not be here washing cabbages, if you knew how to live among men.’— 

[A] That is how Reason can make different actions seem right. [B] Reason is a two- 
handled pot: you can grab it from the right or the left. 


helium, O terra hospita, portas; 

Bello armantur equi, helium haec armenta minantur. 
Sed tamen iidem olim curru succedere sued 
Quadrupedes, etfrena jugo concordia ferre; 
Spes est pads. 


608 


[You are threatening war; what a hospitable land! Horses are armed for war: war is 
what these beasts portend! - Yet those same animals are often yoked to carts, plodding 
tranquilly in harness; there is hope for peace.]— 

[C] When they lectured Solon for shedding vain and useless tears at the death of his 
son, he replied, ‘It is precisely because they are vain and useless that I am right to shed 
them.’ Socrates’ wife exclaimed, increasing her grief: ‘Those wretched judges have 
condemned him to death unjustly!’ But Socrates replied, ‘Would you really prefer that I 
were justly condemned?’— 

[A] We pierce our ears: the Greeks held that to be a mark of slavery. When we lie 
with our wives we hide away: the Indians lie with them in public. The Scythians used 
their temples to execute foreigners: elsewhere temples serve as sanctuaries:— 


[B] Inde furor vulgi, quod numina vicinorum 
Odit quisque locus, cum solos credat habendos 
Esse Deos quos ipse colit. 


[The fury of the mob is aroused since everyone hates his neighbours’ gods, convinced 
that the gods he adores are the only true ones.]— 

[A] I have heard tell of a judge who, whenever he came across in his lawbooks a 
thorny disagreement between Bartolus and Baldus or a subject marked by conflicting 
interpretations, wrote in the margin, Question for friend, meaning by that that the truth 
was so entangled in controversy that in a similar case he could favour whichever party 
he wanted to. It was only lack of wit and intellect which stopped him from writing 
Question for friend all over the place! Counsel and judges today find enough bias in 
their lawsuits to bowl them any way they please. A field of study so limitless, dependent 
on the authority of so many opinions and subject to such arbitrariness, is bound to give 
rise to an extreme confusion of judgements. There is no case so clear that it does not 
provoke controversy. One court judges this way: another reverses the verdict and then, 
on a later occasion, reverses its own judgement. Familiar examples of this can be seen 
in an astonishing abuse which stains the splendour and ceremonial authority of our 
judicial system: the verdict of the parties is not to settle for the verdict of the Court: 
they dash from one judge to another for a decision on the same case. 

As for the licence of philosophical opinion about vice and virtue, there is no need to 
go lengthily into that; it is better to pass over some of the notions in silence than to 
trumpet them abroad [C] before weaker intellects. [B] Arcesilaus said that in lechery 
proclivities [C] and occasions [B] were irrelevant.’— ‘Et obscoenas voluptates... si natura 


609 


requirit, non genere, aut loco, aut ordine, sed forma, aetate, figura metiendas Epicurus 
putat' [Epicurus thinks that when Nature demands to be satisfied by lascivious pleasures, 
we need not consider family origin, position or rank but only beauty, youth and figure]. 
‘Ne amores quidem sanctos a sapiente alienos esse arbitrantur” [They even think that 
forbidden affaires are not incompatible with being a Sage]. ‘Quaeramus ad quam usque 
aetatem juvenes amandi sint’ [Let us investigate up to what age it is proper to love young 
men]. The last two quotations are Stoic; together with the reproach which Dicaearchus 
made to Plato himself on this subject, they show how far even the sanest philosophy will 
go in tolerating quite excessive licence, far from common practice.— 

[A] Laws gain their authority from actual possession and custom: it is perilous to go 
back to their origins; laws, like our rivers, get greater and nobler as they roll along: 
follow them back upstream to their sources and all you find is a tiny spring, hardly 
recognizable; as time goes by it swells with pride and grows in strength. But just look at 
those Ancient concerns which gave the original impulse to that mighty stream, famed, 
full of dignity, awesome and venerable: you then see them to be so light and so delicate 
that it is not surprising that these people here - philosophers who weigh everything and 
reduce everything to reason, never accepting anything on authority and trust - reach 
verdicts far removed from those of the generality. These people, who model themselves 
on their concept of Nature as she originally was, not surprisingly stray from the common 
path in most of their opinions. Lew of them for example would have approved of the 
constraints we impose on marriage; [C] most of them wanted a community of wives 
without binding obligations. [A] Courteous conventions like ours they rejected.— 
Chrysippus said that, for a dozen olives, a philosopher will turn a dozen somersaults in 
public, even with his breeches off.— [C] He could hardly have advised Clisthenes 
against giving his fair daughter Agarista to Hippoclides, just because he saw him stand 
on his head on a table with his legs wide apart in the air.— 

In the midst of a discussion, and in the presence of his followers, Metrocles rather 
injudiciously let off a fart. To hide his embarrassment he stayed at home until, 
eventually, Crates came to pay him a visit; to his consolations and arguments Crates 
added the example of his own licence: he began a farting match with him, thereby 
removing his scruples and, into the bargain, converting him to the freer Stoic school 
from the more socially oriented Peripatetics whom he had formerly followed.— What 
we call ‘honourable’ behaviour - not to dare to perform openly actions which are 
‘honourable’ when done in private - they termed silliness. As for ingeniously concealing 
or disowning those of our actions which Nature, custom and our very desires publish 
and proclaim abroad, they reckoned that to be a vice. They thought it a desacralizing of 
Venus’ mysteries to take them out from the discreet sanctuary of her temple and exhibit 


610 


them to the public gaze: draw back the curtains, and her sports are debased. (Shame has 
a kind of weight: concealment, dissimulation and constraint form part of our esteem.) 
They thought that it was most ingenious that Lust, out of regret for the dignity and 
convenience of her traditional bedchambers, should don the mask of Virtue, seeking to 
avoid being prostituted at the crossroads and trampled underfoot before the eyes of the 
mob. That is why [A] some say that abolishing the public brothels would not merely 
take the fornication at present restricted to such places and spread it everywhere, but 
would also stimulate that vice in men by making it more difficult: 


Moechus es Aufidiae, qui vir, Corvine, fuisti; 
Rivalis fuerat qui turn, ille vir est. 

Cur aliena placet tibi, quae tua non placet uxor? 
Nunquicl securus non potes arrigere? 


[Corvinus! You used to be the husband of Aufidia; she has married your rival and 
you are her lover. Now she has become the wife of another, she pleases you (she never 
did when she was your own). Why? Are you unable to get it up without risking a 
beating?]— 

You can find a thousand variations on that experience. 


Nullus in urbe fuit tota qui tangere vellet 
Uxorem gratis, Caeciliane, tuam, 

Dum licuit; sed nunc, positis custodibus, ingens 
Turba fututorum est. Ingeniosus homo es. 


[Caecilianus: when you left your wife free, nobody in the whole of Rome wanted to 
touch her: now you have put guards round her, she is besieged by a huge crowd of 
fucking admirers. Clever chap!]— 

Once a philosopher was surprised in the very act; asked what he was doing, he 
coldly replied: ‘I am planting a man’; he no more blushed than if he had been caught 
planting garlic.— 

[C] It is, I think, too tender and respectful an opinion when one of our great 
religious authors holds that Necessity actually compels this act to be carried out in 
modest seclusion: he could not convince himself that the Cynics actually consummated 
it in their licentious embraces, but were content with imitating lascivious motions in 
order to display that absence of shame which formed part of their teachings. He thought 
that they had to find a secluded place later on, so as to be able to ejaculate what shame 
had constrained them to hold back. But he had insufficiently plumbed the depths of the 


611 


Cynics’ debauchery: for when Diogenes was masturbating in the presence of crowds of 
bystanders, he specifically said he wanted to give his belly complete satisfaction by 
rubbing it up like this. To those who asked why his ‘hunger’ had to be satisfied in the 
street, not in some more suitable place, he replied, ‘I was in the street when I felt 
hungry.’ Women philosophers who joined this school joined in with their bodies - 
everywhere and indiscriminately: Hipparchia was only admitted into the group of 
disciples around Crates on condition that she followed the customary practices and rules 
in every particular.— 

These philosophers attached the highest value to virtue; they rejected all other 
disciplines except morals; nevertheless, they attributed ultimate authority, above any 
law, to the decisions of their Sage: they decreed no restraints on pleasure [A] except 
moderation and the respect for the freedom of others. 

Heraclitus and Protagoras noted that wine tastes bitter when you are sick, delightful 
when you are well, and that an oar looks crooked in the water but straight out of it; from 
these and similar contradictory appearances they argued that every object contains 
within itself the causes of such appearances: that there was a bitterness in wine which 
was related to the taste of the sick man; a quality of bentness in the oar which was 
related to whoever was looking at it in the water; and so on, for all the rest. That is 
equivalent to saying that everything is in everything; from which it follows that nothing 
is in anything: for where everything is, nothing is.— 

It was this opinion which reminded me of an experience which we have all had, that 
once you start digging down into a piece of writing there is simply no slant or meaning - 
straight, bitter, sweet or bent - which the human mind cannot find there. 

Take that clearest, purest and most perfect Word there can ever be: how much 
falsehood and error have men made it give birth to! Is there any heresy which has not 
discovered ample evidence there for its foundation and continuance? That is why there 
is one proof which the founders of such erroneous doctrines will never give up: evidence 
based upon exegesis of words. 

A man of some rank, deeply immersed in the quest for the philosopher’s stone, 
wanted to justify it to me recently on authority: he cited five or six Biblical texts which 
he said were the ones he chiefly relied on to salve his conscience (for he is in holy 
orders). The choice of texts he produced was not only amusing but most applicable to 
the defence of that egregious science. 

That is how divinatory nonsense comes to be believed in. Provided that a writer of 
almanacs has already gained enough authority for people to bother to read his books, 


612 


examining his words for implications and shades of meaning, he can be made to say 
anything whatever - like Sybils. There are so many ways of taking anything, that it is 
hard for a clever mind not to find in almost any subject something or other which 
appears to serve his point, directly or indirectly. [C] That explains why an opaque, 
ambiguous style has been so long in vogue. All an author needs to do is to attract the 
concern and attention of posterity. (He may achieve that not so much by merit as by 
some chance interest in his subject-matter.) Then, whether out of subtlety or stupidity, 
he can contradict himself or express himself obscurely: no matter! Numerous minds will 
get out their sieves, sifting and forcing any number of ideas through them, some of them 
relevant, some off the point, some flat contradictory to his intentions, but all of them 
doing him honour. He will grow rich out of his students’ resources - like dons being 
paid their midsummer fees at the Lendit fair. 

[A] This has lent value to many a worthless piece, making several books seem 
valuable by loading on to them anything at all; one and the same work is susceptible to 
thousands upon thousands of diverse senses and nuances - as many as we like. [C] Is it 
possible that Homer really wanted to say all that people have made him say,— and that 
he really did provide us with so many and so varied figurative meanings that 
theologians, military leaders, philosophers and all sorts of learned authors (no matter 
how different or contradictory their treaties) can refer to him and cite his authority as 
the Master General of all duties, works and craftsmen, the Counsellor General of all 
enterprises? 

[A] Anyone on the lookout for oracles and predictions has found plenty of material 
there! I have a learned friend who is astonishingly good at producing wonderfully apt 
passages from Homer in favour of our religion: he cannot be easily prised from the 
opinion that Homer actually intended them (yet he knows Homer as well as any man 
alive). [C] And the very things he finds favouring our religion were thought in ancient 
times to favour theirs. 

See how Plato is tossed and turned about. All are honoured to have his support, so 
they couch him on their own side. They trot him out and slip him into any new opinion 
which fashion will accept. When matters take a different turn, then they make him 
disagree with himself. They force him to condemn forms of behaviour which were quite 
licit in his own century, just because they are illicit in ours. The more powerful and 
vigorous the mind of his interpreters, the more vigorously and powerfully they do it. 

[A] Democritus took the very foundations of Heraclitus - his assertion that things 
bear within themselves all the features we find in them - and drew the contrary 
conclusion, namely, that objects have none of the qualities we find in them: from the 


613 


fact that honey is sweet to some and bitter to others, he concluded that it was neither 
sweet nor bitter. The Pyrrhonists said that they did not know whether it is sweet or bitter 
or neither or both, for they always reach the highest summit of doubt.— [C] The 
Cyrenaics held that nothing is perceptible which comes from without: the only things 
perceptible are those which affect us inwardly, such as pain and pleasure. They did not 
even recognize the existence of tones or colours, but only certain emotional impulses 
produced by them; on these alone Man must base his judgement: Protagoras thought 
that whatever appears true is true for the man concerned; the Epicureans place 
judgement - in the case of both knowledge and pleasure - in the senses. Plato wanted 
judgements about Truth, and Truth herself, to be independent of opinion and the senses, 
belonging only to the mind and thought.— 

[A] Such discussion has brought me to the point where I must consider the senses: 
they are the proof as well as the main foundation of our ignorance. 

Without a doubt, anything that is known is known by the faculty of the knower; for, 
since judgement proceeds from the activity of a judge, it is reasonable that he perform 
that activity by his own means and by his will, not by outside constraint (as would be the 
case if the essence of an object were such that it forced us to know it). Now knowledge 
is conveyed through the senses: they are our Masters: 


[B] via qua munita fidei 

Proximo fert humanum in pectus templaque mentis. 


[the highway by which conviction penetrates straight to men’s hearts and to the 
temple of their minds.]— 

[A] Knowledge begins with them and can be reduced to them. After all, we would 
have no more knowledge than a stone if we did not know that there exist sound, smell, 
light, taste, measure, weight, softness, hardness, roughness, colour, sheen, breadth, 
depth. They form the foundations and principles on which our knowledge is built. [C] 
Indeed, for some thinkers, knowledge is sensation. [A] Anyone who can force me to 
contradict the evidence of the senses has got me by the throat: he cannot make me 
retreat any further. The senses are the beginning and the end of human knowledge. 


Invenies primis ab sensibus esse creatam 
Notitiam veri, neque sensus posse refelli. 
Quid majore fide porro quam sensus haberi 
Debet? 


614 


[You realize that the conception of truth is produced by the basic senses; the senses 
cannot be refuted. What should we trust more than our senses, then?]— 

Attribute as little to them as you can, but you will have to grant them this: that all 
the instruction we receive is conveyed by them and through them. Cicero says that when 
Chrysippus assayed denying their force and power, so many contrary arguments and 
overwhelming objections occurred to him that he could not answer them. Whereupon 
Carneades, who maintained the opposite side, boasted of fighting him with his own 
words and weapons, exclaiming, ‘Wretch! You have been defeated by your own 
strength!’— 

For us there is absolutely nothing more absurd than to say that fire is not hot; that 
light does not illuminate; that iron has no weight or resistance. Those are notions 
conveyed to us by our senses. There is no belief or knowledge in man of comparable 
certainty. 

Now, on the subject of the senses, my first point is that I doubt that Man is provided 
with all the natural senses.— I note that several creatures live full, complete lives 
without sight; others, without hearing. Who can tell whether we, also, lack one, two, 
three or more senses? If we do lack any, our reason cannot even discover that we do so. 
Our senses are privileged to be the ultimate frontiers of our perception: beyond them 
there is nothing which could serve to reveal the existence of the senses we lack. One 
sense cannot reveal another: 

[B] An poterunt oculos aures reprehendere, an aures 
Tactus, an hunc porro tactum sapor arguet oris, 

An confutabunt nares, oculive revincent? 


[Can the ears correct the eyes; the ears the touch? Can the tastes in our mouths 
correct the touch? Or will our nostrils and our eyes prove touch to be wrong?] 

[A] They all form, each one of them, the ultimate boundary of our faculty of 
knowledge: 


seorsum cuique potestas 
Divisa est, sua vis cuique est. 


[For each has received its share and power, quite separate from the others.]— 

A man born blind cannot be made to understand what it is not to see; he cannot be 
made to wish he had sight and to regret what he is lacking. (Therefore we ought not to 


615 


take comfort from our souls’ being happy and satisfied with the senses we do have; if we 
are deprived and imperfect, our souls have no way of sensing it.) It is impossible to say 
anything to that blind man by reason, argument or comparison, which will fix in his 
understanding what light, colour and sight really are. There is nothing beyond the senses 
which can supply evidence of them. We do find people who are born blind expressing a 
wish to see: that does not mean that they know what they are asking for. They have 
learned from us that they lack something which we have, and they wish that they had it; 
[C] they name it all right, as well as its effects and its consequences; [A] but they do not 
know what it is, for all that; they cannot even get near to grasping what it is. 

I have met a nobleman of good family who was born blind, or, at least, blind enough 
not to know what sight is. He has so little knowledge of what he is lacking that he is 
always using words appropriate to seeing, just as we do; he applies them in his own 
peculiar way. When he was presented with one of his own godchildren, he took him in 
his arms and said: ‘My God, what a handsome child. How nice to see him! What a 
happy face he has.’ He will say (like one of us): ‘What a lovely view there is from this 
room! What a clear day. How bright the sun is.’ And that is not all. Hearing how much 
we enjoy the sports of hunting, tennis and shooting, he likes them, too; he tries to join in 
and believes that he can take part like us. He gets carried away, has a great deal of fun 
and yet has no knowledge at all of these sports, except through the ears. On open 
ground, where he can use his spurs, somebody shouts, ‘There goes a hare.’ Then 
somebody says, ‘Look, the hare has been caught.’ You will see him as proud of the kill 
as other men he has heard. 

At tennis he takes the ball in his left hand and hits it with his racket. As for the 
harquebus, he shoots at random, and is delighted when his men tell him he has shot too 
high or too wide. 

How do we know that the whole human race is not doing something just as silly? 
We may all lack some sense or other; because of that defect, most of the features of 
objects may be concealed from us. How can we know that the difficulties we have in 
understanding many of the works of Nature do not derive from this, or that several of 
the actions of animals which exceed our powers of understanding are produced by a 
sense-faculty which we do not possess? Perhaps some of them, by such means, enjoy a 
fuller life, a more complete life than we do. 

We need virtually all our senses merely to recognize an apple: we recognize redness 
in it, sheen, smell and sweetness. An apple may well have other qualities than that: for 
example powers of desiccation or astringency, for which we have no corresponding 
senses.— 


616 


Take what we call the occult properties of many objects (such as the magnet 
attracting iron).— Is it not likely that there are certain senses known to Nature which 
furnish the faculties necessary for perceiving them and understanding them, and that the 
lack of such faculties entails our ignorance of their true essence? There may be some 
peculiar sense which tells cocks when it is midday or midnight and makes them crow, 
[C] or which teaches hens (before any practical experience) to fear the sparrow-hawk 
but not larger animals like geese or peacocks; which warns chickens of the innate 
hostility of cats but tells them not to fear dogs; which puts them on their guard against a 
miaou (quite a pleasing sound, really) but not against a bark (a harsh and aggressive 
sound);— which tells hornets, ants and rats how to select the best cheese and the best 
pear, before they even taste them; [A] which leads stags [C] elephants and snakes [A] to 
recognize herbs necessary to cure them. 

There is no sense which is not dominant and which does not have the means of 
contributing vast amounts of knowledge. If we had no comprehension of sounds, 
harmony and the spoken word, that would throw all the rest of our knowledge into 
inconceivable confusion. For, quite apart from all that arises from the properties of each 
individual sense, think of the arguments, consequences and conclusions which we infer 
by comparing one sense with another. Let an intelligent man imagine human nature 
created, from the beginning, without sight; let him reflect how much ignorance and 
confusion such a defect would entail, how much darkness and blindness there would be 
in our minds. We can see from that how vital it would be for our knowledge of truth if 
we lacked another sense, or two or three senses. We have fashioned a truth by 
questioning our five senses working together; but perhaps we need to harmonize the 
contributions of eight or ten senses if we are ever to know, with certainty, what Truth is 
in essence. 

Those schools which attack Man’s claim to possess knowledge base themselves 
mainly on the fallibility and weakness of our senses: for, since all knowledge comes to 
us through them and by them, we have nothing left to hold on to if they fail in their 
reports to us, if they change and corrupt what they convey to us from outside, or if the 
light which filters through to our mind from them is darkened in the process. 

This ultimate difficulty has given rise to many strange notions: that a given object 
does have all the qualities we find in it; that it has none of the qualities which we think 
we find in it;— or, as the Epicureans contend, that the Sun is no bigger than our sight 
judges it to be - 


[B] Quicquid id est, nihilofertur majore figura 
Quam nostris oculis quam cemimus, esse videtur 


617 


[Be that as it may, its size is no bigger than it seems when we behold it]— 


[A] - or, that those appearances which make an object look big when you are close 
to it and smaller when you are farther from it, are both true - 


[B] Nec tamen hie oculis falii concedimus hilum 
Proinde animi vitium hoc oculis adfingere noli 


[We do not at all concede that the eyes can be deceived. Do not attribute to the eyes 
the errors of the mind]— 

[A] - or, conclusively, that there is no deception whatsoever in our senses, so that we 
must throw ourselves on their mercy and seek elsewhere the justification for any 
differences and contradictions which we find in them: that, indeed, we should invent 
some lie or raving lunacy (yes, they get as far as that!) rather than condemn our senses. 

[C] Timagoras said that he did not really see the candle-flame double when he 
squeezed his eye-ball sideways, but that this appearance arose from a defect of opinion 
not of vision.— [A] The absurdest of all absurdities [C] for Epicureans [A] is to deny 
[C] the effective power of [A] the senses: 


Proinde quod in quoque est his visum tempore, verum est. 
Et, si non potuit ratio dissolvere causam , 

Cur ea quae fuerint juxtim quadrata, procul sint 
Visa rotunda, tamen praestat rationis egentem 
Reddere mendose causas utriusque figurae, 

Quam manibus manifesto suis emittere quoquam, 

Et violarefidem primam, et convellere tota 
Fundamenta quibus nixatur vita salusque. 

Non modo enim ratio ruat omnis, vita quoque ipsa 
Concidat extemplo, nisi credere sensibus ausis, 

Praecipitesque locos vitare, et caetera quae sint 
In genere hoc fugienda. 


[Consequently, whatever, at any time, has seemed to the senses to be true, is in fact 
true. If reason cannot unravel the causes which explain why things that are square when 
you are close to them appear round at a distance, it is better to find some untrue 
explanation of these two different impressions than to let the evidence of our senses slip 
through our fingers, violate first principles and shake the foundations on which our lives 
and their preservation are built. For, if we could no longer trust our senses and so avoid 


618 


the giddy heights and other dangers Man must shun, not only would our Reason collapse 
in ruins but our lives as well.]— 

[C] That is a counsel of despair. It is quite unphilosophical. It reveals that human 
knowledge can only be supported by an unreasonable Reason, by mad lunatic ravings; 
that, if Man is to make himself worth anything, it is better to exploit ‘Reason’ such as 
this or any other remedy, no matter how fantastic it may be, rather than to admit so 
unflattering a truth that he is, of necessity, as stupid as a beast. Man cannot avoid the 
fact that his senses are both the sovereign regents of his knowledge, and yet, in all 
circumstances, uncertain and fallible. So here they must fight to a finish; if legitimate 
weapons fail us - and they do - they must use stubbornness, foolhardiness or cheek! 

[B] Should what the Epicureans say be true (namely, that if the senses play us false 
we have no knowledge at all);— and should what the Stoics say be equally true (that 
sensible appearances are so deceptive that they can give rise in us to no knowledge 
whatever); then we are forced to conclude, at the expense of the two great schools of 
Dogmatists, that there is no such thing as knowledge. 

[A] Anybody can provide as many examples as he pleases of the ways our senses 
deceive or cheat us, since so many of their faults or deceptions are quite banal: a 
trumpet sounds a league behind us, but an echo in a valley may make it seem to come 
from in front: 


[B] Extantesque procul medio de gurgite monies 
Iidem apparent longe diversi licet 
Etfugere ad puppim colies campique videntur 
Quos agimus propter navim 
ubi in medio nobis equus acer obhaesit 
Flumine, equi corpus transversum ferre vicletur 
Vis, etin adversum f lumen contruclere raptim. 


[Distant mountains beetling over the sea may appear as one, yet are in fact many; as 
we sail along, hills and plains appear to be rushing towards our prow; if we look down 
when our horse stops in mid-stream, the river seems to be forcing it to go up-stream 
against the current.]— 

[A] Hold a musket-ball beneath your second finger, with your middle finger 
entwined over it: you will have to force yourself to admit that there is only one ball, so 
decidedly do you sense it to be two. We can see every day that our senses have mastery 
over our reason, forcing it to receive impressions which it knows to be false and judges 
to be false. 


619 


I will not go into the sense of touch. Its effects are immediate, lively and concrete; 
many a time, as a result of the pain which it causes the body, it overthrows all those fine 
Stoic axioms. It takes a man who has resolutely made up his mind that colic paroxysms 
are a thing indifferent (like any other pain or disease) and that they have no power to 
affect the blessed state of supreme felicity in which the Sage has been lodged by his 
Stoic Virtue - and makes him yell about his belly. 

No heart is so flabby that the sounds of our drums and trumpets do not set it ablaze, 
nor so hard that sweet music does not tickle it and enliven it; no soul is so sour that it 
does not feel touched by some feeling of reverence— when it contemplates the sombre 
vastness of our Churches, the great variety of their decorations and our ordered liturgy, 
or when it hears the enchantment of the organ and the poised religious harmony of 
men’s voices. Even those who come to scoff are brought to distrust their opinion by a 
shiver in their heart and a sense of dread. 

[B] As for me, I do not think I would be strong enough to remain unmoved even by 
verses of Horace or Catullus, if well sung by a good voice coming from a fair young 
mouth! [C] Zeno was right to claim that the voice is Beauty’s flower.— Some people 
have even tried to make me believe that a famous man known to all Frenchmen had 
impressed me unduly with a recital of some of his verses, which seem very different 
seen on paper than heard in the air, and that my eyes would contradict my ears, so great 
is the power of eloquent delivery to endow any work which accepts its sway with value 
and style. 

While on the topic, Philoxenus’ reaction was not without charm: he heard a piece he 
had composed being sung badly, so he jumped on some of the singer’s tiles and 
smashed them. ‘I spoil your things,’ (he said) ‘you despoil mine!’— 

[A] Why did even those who had firmly decided to die avert their gaze from the 
very blow which they ordered to be struck? Why do those who have freely agreed to 
cauterizations and incisions for the sake of their health find that they cannot stand the 
sight of all the preparations, of the surgical instruments or of the actual operation? Sight 
does not share in the pain. 

Are not these appropriate examples for demonstrating the authority of our senses 
over our powers of reason? - Even though we know that a lady’s tresses are borrowed 
from a page or a lackey; that her rosy colour comes from Spain and her smooth 
whiteness from the ocean, we still find her person more attractive and agreeable - quite 
unreasonably, though, for in all that nothing is her own: 


Auferimur cultu; gemmis auroque teguntiir 


620 


Crimina: pars minima est ipsa puella sui. 
Saepe ubi sit quod ames inter tarn multa requiras: 
Decipit liac oculos Aegide, dives amor. 


[We are carried away by clothing; ugliness is hidden behind gems and gold; the 
smallest part of herself is the actual girl! You can often look in vain for the girl you love 
under all these gewgaws. This is the shield with which the rich deceive a lover’s eyes.]— 

What great power our poets attribute to the senses, when they make Narcissus 
enamoured of his own reflection: 


Cunctaque miratur, quibus est mirabilis ipse; 
Se cupit imprudens; et qui probat, ipse probatur; 
Dumque petit, petitur; pariterque accendit et ardet. 


[He is enchanted by his own enchantments; unawares, he loves himself; he both 
praises and is praised; he yearns and is yearned for; the passion he kindles enflames 
himself] 

Similarly, Pygmalion’s mind was disturbed by the visual impact of his ivory statue: 
he fell in love with it and sighed for it: 


Oscula dat reddique putat, sequiturque tenetque, 
Et credit tactis digitos insidere membris; 

Et metuit pressos veniat ne livor in artus. 


[He kisses her, and believes his kisses are returned; he waits on her, embraces her; he 
believes her limbs respond to the touch of his fingers; he fears that in his ardour he may 
bruise her.]— 

Take a philosopher, put him in a cage made from thin wires set wide apart; hang 
him from one of the towers of Notre Dame de Paris. It is evident to his reason that he 
cannot fall; yet (unless he were trained as a steeplejack) when he looks down from that 
height he is bound to be terrified and beside himself. It is hard enough to feel safe at the 
top of a church tower, even behind open-work ramparts of stone: some people cannot 
even bear thinking about it. 

Take a beam wide enough to walk along: suspend it between two towers: there is no 
philosophical wisdom, however firm, which could make us walk along it just as we 
would if we were on the ground. 

I am not particularly afraid of heights, but when I was on the French side of the 


621 


Italian Alps I made an assay and found that I could not suffer the sight of those 
boundless depths without a shiver of horror; I was at least my own height away from the 
edge and could not have fallen over unless I deliberately exposed myself to danger: yet 
my knees and thighs were trembling. I also noticed that, whatever the height, it was 
comforting and reassuring if there happened to be some tree or rock jutting out on the 
slope which could hold our gaze and interrupt our vision: it was as though they could 
have helped us if we fell. But when the precipices were sheer and smooth we could not 
even look at them without feeling giddy, [C] ‘ut despici sine vertigine simul oculorum 
animique non possit’ [such that no one could look down without vertigo in eyes and 
mind].— 

Which shows how sight can deceive us. 

One fine philosopher even poked out his eyes so as to free his mind from visual 
debauchery; he could then go on philosophizing in freedom. But by the same standard 
he ought to have blocked up his ears— - [B] which Theophrastus says are the most 
dangerous of all our organs when it comes to receiving violent impressions capable of 
changing and disturbing us.— [A] Eventually he would have to deprive himself of every 
other sense (tantamount to life and being), for all the senses can have this dominant 
power over our reason and our soul: [C] ‘Fit etiam saepe specie quadam, saepe vocum 
gravitate et cantibus, ut pellantur animi vehementius; saepe etiam cura et timore ’ [Some 
visual feature, some grave voice or incantations may often strike the mind most 
vehemently: worry and care may often do that too].— 

[A] Doctors maintain that people with some complexions can be driven mad by 
certain sounds or instruments. I have known people who could not even hear a bone 
being gnawed under their table without losing control; and there is hardly a person who 
is not upset by the sharp rasping sound of a file against iron. Some people are moved to 
anger or even hatred by hearing somebody chewing nearby or talking with some 
obstruction of their throat or nose. 

Gracchus had a prompter who was a flautist; he conducted the voice of his master, 
softening it or making it firm:— what use was he if the rhythm and quality of the 
sounds did not have the power of moving and swaying the judgement of the listeners? 
We have good enough reason to make a fuss about this judgement of ours: it lets itself 
be affected and managed by the modulations and properties of so light a breath of wind! 

The senses deceive our intellect; it deceives them in their turn. Our soul sometimes 
gets her own back: [C] they both vie with each other in lying and deceiving. [A] When 
we are moved to anger, we do not hear things as they are: 


622 


Et solem geminum, et duplices se ostendere Thebas. 
[We see twin suns: two Thebes.]— 


Love someone and she appears more beautiful than she is: 


[B] Multimodis igitur pravas turpesque videmus 
Esse in delitiis, summoque in honore vigere. 


[Many ugly and deformed women are deeply loved, enjoying, as we see, the highest 
favour.]— 

[A] And anyone we dislike appears more ugly. When a man is in pain and affliction, 
the very light of day seems sombre and dark. Our senses are not only changed for the 
worse, they are knocked quite stupid by the passions of the soul. How many things do 
we see which we do not even notice when our minds are preoccupied with other 
matters? 


In rebus quoque apertis noscere possis, 

Si non advertas animum, proinde esse, quasi omni 
Tenmpore semotaefuerint, longeque remotae. 


[Even in the case of things which are clearly visible, you know that if you do not turn 
your mind to them, it is as though they had never been there or were far away.]— 

It seems, then, that the soul draws the powers of the senses right into herself and 
makes them waste their time. 

And so, both within and without, man is full of weakness and of lies. 

[B] Those who have compared our lives to a dream are right - perhaps more right 
than they realized. When we are dreaming our soul lives, acts and exercises all her 
faculties neither more nor less than when she is awake, but she does it much more 
slackly and darkly; the difference is definitely not so great as between night and the 
living day: more like that between night and twilight. In one case the soul is sleeping, in 
the other more or less slumbering; but there is always darkness, perpetual Cimmerian 
darkness. 

[C] We wake asleep: we sleep awake. When I am asleep I do see things less clearly 
but I never find my waking pure enough or cloudless. Deep sleep can sometimes even 
put dreams to sleep; but our waking is never so wide awake that it can cure and purge 
those raving lunacies, those waking dreams that are worse than the real ones. 


623 


Our rational souls accept notions and opinions produced during sleep, conferring on 
activities in our dreams the same approbation and authority as on our waking dreams: 
why should we therefore not doubt whether our thinking and acting are but another 
dream; our waking, some other species of sleep? 

[A] If the senses are our basic judges, we should not merely call upon our own for 
counsel: where this faculty is concerned, the animals have as much right as we do, or 
even more. Some certainly have better hearing, sight, smell, touch or taste. Democritus 
said that the gods and the beasts have faculties of sense far more perfect than Man does. 

Now there are extreme differences between the action of their senses and ours: our 
saliva cleanses and dries up our wounds: it kills snakes.— 


Tantaque in his rebus distantia differitasque est, 
Ut quod aliis cibus est, aliis fuat acre venerium. 
Saepe etenim serpens, hominis contacta saliva, 
Disperit, ac sese mandendo confict ipsa. 


[There are so many differences and variations: one man’s food is another man’s 
bitter poison. Indeed if a snake comes into contact with human saliva, it begins to bite 
its own tail and dies.]— 

So what quality are we to give to saliva? Do we follow our own senses or the snake’s? 
We are trying to discover the truth about its true essence: which of the two will tell us? 
Pliny says that there are certain ‘sea-hares’ in the Indies which are poison to us and we 
to them: a touch kills them.— Which is truly poisonous, the fish or the man? Which 
should we believe: the effect of the fish on the man or the man on the fish? [B] The 
quality of one kind of air is infectious to Man but not to cattle; another has the quality 
of being infectious to cattle but harmless to men. Which of the two has truly and 
naturally the quality of being infectious? [A] Sufferers from jaundice see everything 
paler and yellower than we do: 


[B] Lurida praeterea fiunt quaecunque tuentur Arquati. 


[Those ill from ‘rainbow-yellow’ see everything in sallow colours.] 


452 


[A] There is a suffusion of blood under the skin around the eye which doctors call 
Hyposphragma - those who suffer from it see everything blood-red.— How do we know 
that these humours, which can affect the workings of Man’s eyesight, are not the 


624 


dominant norm among beasts? Some animals, as we know, have yellow eyes exactly like 
sufferers from jaundice and others have eyes which are blood-red. It is probable that the 
colours of objects appear different to them and to us. Who judges them right? Nobody 
claims that the essence of anything relates only to its effect on Man. Hardness, 
whiteness, depth, bitterness - such qualities are of service to animals and are known to 
them as to ourselves: Nature has granted that they be useful to animals as well as to us 
men. 

If we squeeze one of our eyes, the objects we look at appear thinner and elongated: 
many beasts have eyes which are always squeezed up like that. For all we know, that 
elongated form is the true one, not what our eyes see in their normal state. [B] If we 
press up our eyes from the bottom, we see double: 


Bina lucemarum florentia lumina flammis, 
Et duplices hominum facies, et corpora bina. 


[The lamp has twin flowerings of light, men have twin faces and twin bodies.]— 

[A] If our ears are blocked up or if the auricular passage is constricted we hear 
sounds differently from normal: animals have hairy ears or, in some cases, merely a little 
hole instead of an ear: consequently, they do not hear what we hear and the sound is 
perceived differently.— 

At banquets or in the theatre, when various shades of coloured glass are placed in 
front of the torches, we know that they can make everything appear green, yellow or 
violet: 


[B] Et vulgo faciunt id lutea russaque vela 
Et ferruginea, cum magnis intenta theatris 
Per malos volgata trabesque trementia pendent: 
Namque ibi consessum caveai subter, et omnem 
Scenai speciem, patrum, matrumque, deorumque 
Inficiunt, coguntque suo volitare colore. 


[When yellow, red or rust-brown awnings are stretched over our vast theatres, 
flapping about in the wind on their poles and their frames, it is quite usual for them to 
impart their colours to the stage and to the whole assembly seated in their seats, to 
senators and matrons and to the statues of the gods, as their colours dance about.]— 

[A] It seems likely that the different coloured eyes which we can notice in some 
animals may impart corresponding colours to what the animals see. 


625 


If we want to judge the activities of the senses we should agree with the animals and 
then among ourselves. We are far from doing that. Quarrels are constantly arising 
because one person hears, sees or tastes something differently from another. As much as 
anything, we quarrel over, the diversity of the images conveyed to us by our senses.— 

A child, a man of thirty, a sexagenarian, each hears and sees things differently: that 
is a normal law of Nature. Similarly for taste. Some people’s senses are dullish and 
dimmer: others are more open and acute. We perceive objects to be like this or that in 
accordance with our own state and how they seem to us.— But seeming , for human 
beings, is so uncertain and so controvertible that it is no miracle if we are told that we 
may acknowledge that snow seems white to us but cannot guarantee to establish that it is 
truly so in essence. And once you shake that first principle, all the knowledge in the 
world is inevitably swept away. 

What about our very senses hampering each other? A painting may seem to have 
depth, but feels flat. Musk is pleasant to the smell but offensive to the taste: should we 
call it pleasant or not? There are herbs and ointments suitable to one part of the body 
but injurious to another; honey is pleasant to taste, unpleasant to look at.— Take those 
rings wrought in the shape of plumes which are called in heraldry Feathers without 
Ends. Can any eye ever be sure how wide they are and avoid being taken in by the 
optical illusion? For they seem to get wider on one side, narrower and more pointed on 
the other, especially if you turn them round your finger; yet to your touch they all 
appear to have the same width all the way round. 

- [C] (In the ancient world some men increased their lust by the use of distorting 
mirrors which enlarged whatever was put before them, so that the organs used on the 
job pleased them more, because they looked as though they had grown bigger. But 
which sense did they allow to win? Was it their sight, which showed them their members 
as thick and big as they liked, or was it their touch, which showed the same members to 
be tiny and despicable?) 

[A) Is it our senses which endow the object with these diverse attributes, whereas, in 
reality, objects only have one? Rather like bread when we eat it; it is one thing, bread, 
but we turn it into several: bones, blood, flesh, hair and nails. 


[B] Ut cibus, in membra atque artus cum diditur omnes, 
Disperit , atque aliam naturam sufficit ex se. 


[Like food, which spreads to all our limbs and joints, destroys itself and produces 
another substance.]— 


626 


[A] Moisture is sucked up by the roots of a tree: it becomes trunk, leaf and fruit; air 
is one, but when applied to a trumpet it is diversified into a thousand kinds of sound: is 
it our senses (I say) which similarly fashion such objects with diverse qualities or do they 
really have such qualities? Then, given that doubt, what conclusion can we reach about 
their true essence? 

And then, to go further still: the attributes of illness, madness or sleep make things 
appear different from what they do to the healthy, the sane and the waking man:— is it 
not likely therefore that our rightful state and our natural humours also have attributes 
which can endow an object with a mode of being corresponding to their own 
characteristics, making it conform to themselves, just as our disordered humours do? 
[C] Why should a temperate complexion not endow objects with a form corresponding 
to itself just as our distempers can, stamping its own imprint upon them?— On to his 
wine the queasy man loads tastelessness; the healthy man, a bouquet; the thirsty man, 
sheer delight. 

[A] Now, since our state makes things correspond to itself and transforms them in 
conformity with itself, we can no longer claim to know what anything truly is: nothing 
reaches us except as altered and falsified by our senses. When the compasses, the set- 
square and the ruler are askew, all the calculations made with them and all the structures 
raised according to their measurements, are necessarily out of true and ready to 
collapse. 

The unreliability of our senses renders unreliable everything which they put forward: 


Denique ut in fabrica, si prava est regula prima, 
Normaque si fallax rectis regionibus exit, 

Et libella aliqua si exparte claudicat hilum, 

Omnia mendose fieri atque obstipa necessum est, 
Prava, cubantia, prona, supina, atque absona tecta, 
Jam mere ut quaedam videantur velle, ruantque 
Prodita judiciis fallacibus omnia primis. 

Hie igitur ratio tibi rerum prava necesse est 
Falsaque sit, falsis quaecumque a sensibus orta est. 


[It is as when a building is erected: if the ruler is false from the outset, or the set- 
square deceptive and out of true, if the level limps a bit to one side, then the building is 
necessarily wrong and crooked; it is deformed, pot-bellied, toppling forwards or 
backwards and quite disjointed; some parts seem about to fall down now: all will fall 
down soon, betrayed by the original mistakes of calculation; similarly every argument 
that you base on facts will prove wrong and false, if the facts themselves are based on 


627 


senses which prove false.]— 

And meanwhile who will be a proper judge of such differences? It is like saying that 
we could do with a judge who is not bound to either party in our religious strife, who is 
dispassionate and without prejudice. Among Christians that cannot be.— The same 
applies here: if the judge is old, he cannot judge the sense-impressions of old age, since 
he is a party to the dispute; so too if he is young; so too if he is well; so too if he is 
unwell, asleep or awake.— We would need a man exempt from all these qualities, so 
that, without preconception, he could judge those propositions as matters indifferent to 
him. 

On this reckoning we would need such a judge as never was. 

We register the appearance of objects; to judge them we need an instrument of 
judgement; to test the veracity of that instrument we need practical proof; to test that 
proof we need an instrument. We are going round in circles.— 

The senses themselves being full of uncertainty cannot decide the issue of our 
dispute. It will have to be Reason, then. But no Reason can be established except by 
another Reason. We retreat into infinity.— Our mental faculty of perception is never 
directly in touch with outside objects - which are perceived via the senses, and the 
senses do not embrace an outside object but only their own impressions of it; therefore 
the thought and the appearance are not properties of the object but only the impressions 
and feelings of the senses. Those impressions and that object are different things. So 
whoever judges from appearances judges from something quite different from the 
object itself. 

If you say that these sense-impressions convey the quality of outside objects to our 
souls by means of resemblances, how can our rational soul make sure that they are 
resemblances, since it has no direct contact of its own with the outside objects? It is like 
a man who does not know Socrates; if he sees a portrait of him he cannot say whether it 
resembles him or not.— 

But supposing, nevertheless, that anyone did wish to judge from appearances, he 
cannot do so from all of them, since (as we know from experience) they all mutually 
impede each other because of contradictions and discrepancies. Will he select only 
some appearances to control the others? But the first one selected will have to be tested 
for truth against another one selected, and that one against a third: the end will therefore 
never be reached.— 

To conclude: there is no permanent existence either in our being or in that of 
objects. We ourselves, our faculty of judgement and all mortal things are flowing and 


628 


rolling ceaselessly: nothing certain can be established about one from the other, since 
both judged and judging are ever shifting and changing.— 

‘We have no communication with Being;— as human nature is wholly ‘situated, for 
ever, between birth and death, it shows itself only as a dark ‘shadowy appearance, an 
unstable weak opinion. And if you should ‘determine to try and grasp what Man’s being 
is, it would be exactly like ‘trying to hold a fistful of water: the more tightly you squeeze 
anything the ‘nature of which is always to flow, the more you will lose what you try to 
‘retain in your grasp. So, because all things are subject to pass from change ‘to change, 
Reason is baffled if it looks for a substantial existence in them, ‘since it cannot 
apprehend a single thing which subsists permanently, ‘because everything is either 
coming into existence (and so not fully ‘existing yet) or beginning to die before it is 
bom.’ Plato said that bodies never have existence, though they certainly have birth, [C] 
believing that Homer made Oceanus Father of the Gods and Thetis their Mother, to 
show that all things are in a state of never-ending inconstancy, change and flux (an 
opinion, as he says, common to all the philosophers before his time, with the sole 
exception of Parmenides, who denied that anything has motion - attaching great 
importance to the force of that idea).— 

[A] Pythagoras taught that all matter is labile and flowing;— the Stoics, that there is 
no such thing as the present (which is but the joining and the coupling together of the 
future and past);— ‘Heraclitus, that no man ever stepped twice into the same river’ —([B] 
Epicharmus, that a man who borrowed money in the past does not owe it now, and that 
a man invited to breakfast yesterday evening turns up this morning uninvited, both 
having become different people).— - [A] Heraclitus ‘that no ‘mortal substance can ever 
be found twice in an identical state because the ‘rapidity and ease of its changes make it 
constantly disperse and reassemble; ‘it is coming and going, so that whatever begins to 
be born never achieves ‘perfect existence, since its delivery is never complete and never 
stops as ‘though it had come to the end; but, ever since the seeds of it were sown, it ‘is 
continually modifying and changing from one thing to another; just as ‘from the human 
seed there first springs a shapeless embryo in the mother’s ‘womb, then a human shape, 
then, once out of the womb, a suckling child, ‘then a boy, then, in due course, a youth, a 
mature man, an elderly and ‘then a decrepit, aged man, so that each subsequent age to 
which birth is ‘given is for ever undoing and destroying the previous one.’ 


[B] Mutat enim mundi naturam totius aetas, 
Ex alioque alius status excipere omnia debet, 
Nec manet ulla sui similis res: omnia migrant, 
Omnia commutat natura et vertere cogit. 


629 


[For Time changes the nature of all things in the world; each stage must be 
succeeded by another, nothing remains as it was; all things depart and Nature modifies 
all things and compels them to change.]— 

[A] ‘And after that we men stupidly fear one species of death, when we ‘have 
already passed through so many other deaths and do so still; yet, as ‘Heraclitus said, not 
only is the death of fire the birth of air, and the death ‘of air the birth of water, but we 
may see it even more clearly in ourselves: ‘the flower of our life withers and dies into 
old age; but youth ended in that ‘adult flower, as childhood in youth and as that 
embryonic stage died into ‘childhood; yesterday dies into today, and this day will die 
into tomorrow. ‘Nothing lasts; nothing remains forever one. — 

To prove that this is so: ‘if we remained forever one and the same, how ‘is it that we 
can delight in one thing now and later in another? How can ‘we each be one if we love 
or hate contradictory things, first praising them, ‘then condemning them?— How can we 
have different emotions, no ‘longer retaining the same sentiment within the same 
thought? For it is not ‘likely that we can experience different reactions unless we 
ourselves have ‘changed; but whoever suffers change is no longer the same one: he no 
‘longer is. For his being, as such, changes when his being one changes, as each 
‘personality ever succeeds another. And, consequently, it is of the nature of ‘our senses 
to be misled and deceived. Because they do not know what being ‘is, they take appears 
to be for is. 

‘What is it then which truly IS? That which is eternal - meaning that ‘which has 
never been born; which will never have an end; to which Time ‘can never bring any 
change. For Time is a thing of movement, appearing ‘like a shadow in the eternal flow 
and flux of matter, never remaining stable ‘or’ permanent;— to Time belong the words 
before and after; has been and ‘shall be, words that show at a glance that Time is 
evidently not a thing ‘which IS. For it would be great silliness and manifest falsehood to 
say that ‘something IS which has not yet come into being or has already ceased to ‘be. 

‘With the words “Present”, “This instant”, “Now”, we above all appear ‘to support and 
stabilize our understanding of Time: but Reason strips it ‘bare and at once destroys it: 
for Reason straightway cleaves Now into two ‘distinct parts, the future and the past, as 
needing of necessity to see it thus ‘divided into two parts. 

‘The same applies to Nature (which is measured) as to Time (which ‘measures her): 
for there is nothing in Nature, either, which lasts or subsists; ‘in her, all things are either 
bom, being born, or dying.— 


630 


‘It would therefore be a sin to say He was or He will be of God, who is ‘the only one 
who IS. For those terms are transitions, declensions and ‘vicissitudes in things which 
cannot endure nor remain in Being. 

‘From which we must conclude that God alone is: not according to any ‘measure 
known to Time, but according to an unchanging and immortal ‘eternity, not measured 
by Time, not subject to any declension; before ‘Whom nothing is, neither will there be 
anything after Him, nor anything ‘newer or more recent; but one, existing in reality, He 
fills Eternity with a ‘single Now; nothing really IS but He alone; of Him you cannot say 
He ‘was or He will be: He has no beginning and no end.— 

To that very religious conclusion of a pagan I would merely add one more word 
from a witness of the same condition, in order to bring to a close this long and tedious 
discourse which could furnish me with matter for ever. ‘Oh, what a vile and abject thing 
is Man,’ he said, ‘if he does not rise above humanity.’— 

[C] A pithy saying; a most useful aspiration, but absurd withal. For [A] to make a 
fistful bigger than the fist, an armful larger than the arm, or to try and make your stride 
wider than your legs can stretch, are things monstrous and impossible. Nor may a man 
mount above himself or above humanity: for he can see only with his own eyes, grip 
only with his own grasp. He will rise if God proffers him - [C] extraordinarily -[A] His 
hand; he will rise by abandoning and disavowing his own means, letting himself be 
raised and pulled up by purely heavenly ones.— 

[C] It is for our Christian faith, not that Stoic virtue of his, to aspire to that holy and 
miraculous metamorphosis.— 